o , if love shall live , o , where
till you stand at the portal all play - goers know .
poore hudson ( 28 ) of all was the last ,
because he fixed it , and to stop his talking
is free to all men -- universal prize .
bonie lassie , artless lassie ,
my mother 's silver spectacles , my father 's silver hair ;
then arose old wainamoinen ,
and i murmured , not above my breath , but all apart,--
fled is that music:--do i wake or sleep ?
i see her small hand taking it
and the wind blows colder and stronger ;
can fall from any distance ,
i bear a tongue ne'er wi ' her spak ' ,
then , broken at last , let swell their burly frame
the broad foundations of a finer hope
and slits the thin - spun life . " but not the praise , "
most lowly down , and wore such look of pain
which some of these expiring victims cast
shall glimpse the glory of her visible dream ,
and was , at time of feast or revel
who , whate'er the smooth views we , in public , may drive at ,
stirling for aye :
make - believe , not merely as his tragic world is , but in a further
wallah ! the stream my drink shall be ,
to ribe old their course they hold ,
her presence genders , and her safety gain by flight .
and , when his medicines do no good ,
" blood hath been shed , and love and ye are slaves ,
the thanks of millions yet to be .
son of the sword that first made kings divine ,
shall i not have my dream ?
the song of the master and his men:--
when to our land thou light art bearing ,
come from the gloomy tun with merry shine .
and laughing at weak charles of normandy .
more dear to - day than in that vanished time
" and the triumph of paper o'er guineas ,
meanwhile , since here ye come our friends , with us the gods adore
that has been struck like a slave .
proclaiming peace , let strife be slain .
answered but with laugh and jest .
" five hundred pounds as stake i 'll lay , "
to catch his gift of the loaves and fishes .
the greeks from shame and loss ? unfeeling man !
trace not a record , not a line for me ,
by the blackness of the mountains , and barred aback and in face
and began to wonder what it might all be .
get food and shelter and procreate themselves .
ah , from the soul itself must issue forth
thinking of retirement , i heaved an envious sigh ,
two better fallowis did no man see:--
a rose will fade in a day .
" all that is something of which you know nothing , " he answered ,
and unperceived fly with the filth away ;
" sun , who careerest through the height of heaven ,
he 'd apparently been fighting , for his face was black - and - blue ,
quite as well , i think , as the rest .
which once made pisa famous , long have lain
contraction .
down came the great east wind ; and the ship ran
that he enjoy'd but part , being heir to all .
you can sing along with it -- or it matters not a bit--
what more ? thou know'st it , and hast owned it too ,
the falls of flower , and flower - like floss --
and their light destroys the black
about miss lou it was , or carrie
a happier home .      to him is fate cruel
here rest , upon the lily 's waving stalk ,
if such be nature 's holy plan ,
that die unmarried ere they can behold
that crawled up his boots ,
with bread and water , fearing that the angels would forget to
that he first might shoot his arrow ,
beyond the storied islands of the blest ,
transformed themselves to spheres on steadfast poles ,
revels and wings !
westward she made .....
have reached its end . "
thorny roses of my skin , do n't prick like that .
of that fair forest green :
sure of earth 's welcome as a maiden spring ?
and soon exulting flow'd the song divine ,
in which she walked thus far , and stood ,
and the tree with all its branches
is now to take the greater pains .
a thousand happy fancies that contrive
in her defence , for parents , children , wives .
o daughter , too divinely fair !
lord christ , let me but hold thy hand
knowing not what they are singing .
roll'd of another ; sideling crawl'd a third
of the rysing in the north countrie .
on the ring once more his accustomed place ;
she , in that shameless tinsel?--o nautch - girl , sing again ! "
year after year 1 v.
from that ill thought ; and being blind
and frosts are slain and flowers begotten ,
that fell from baby eyes of blue ;
the vision melted all away ;
fades not that broader outlook of the gods ;
bring , bring me , now , a painter , for the work ,
a little maid sat in a jonquil tree ,
god and my brother , i failing to find ,
than the blind lamb ; and oftentimes one sword
sober with work , and silent with care ;
for pardon , and they shall not bleed .
and have turned away with loathing .
well knows he to what pass , what evil mart
rune l. mariatta -- wainamoinen 's departure
i should appear undignified
weaving a spell ,
surpasses in grandeur the country we boast--
soft oils of fragrance , and ambrosial showers :
vvhen with my huntsmen to the woods i went ,
comes like a new - born joy ,
and tirleth at the pin :
king robert 's self in features , form , and height ,
to numa , thus , the pale patricians fled--
and the lank nomads of the wandering west ,
and nodding by the fire , take down this book ,
by evening 's rosy touch embroider'd o'er .
cold on his bosom the spray showers fall ;
of leaves and fuming rills , aurora 's fan ,
ostendens confectas flamma , & c.
and afar burns ye star
near the clutching fire we sat ,
have you yourself what 's best for men ?
all - coloured clustering gems instead of fruit ;
he , who before had question'd , thus resum'd :
for he was after traytour to the toun
treasure ; but horses i will take none to ithaca , but leave
in all the tree - tops
we were crowded in the cabin ,
but if thou hadst , he should have one ;
they racked their stays and stanchions free
new warr , provok't ; our better part remains
" goog , goo , " ' e sez .   i 'll swear yeh never did
each one of them is doomed . from the deep central seas
that my mother too has perished ,
how beautiful is the rain !
oh , the times , the weary , weary times ! & c.
not certayne , but as a chery fayre full of wo :
have anything to say ! '
in a world where she gives him nothing to do
while early love has forged chains
her face had filled his careless eye
was ebbing faster ,
we now had mounted , where the rock impends
when up he jumps . " there 's land i see :
methinks for such half hellish brood
the original form of the shell . the twisted form of the shell was
melting , wayward , wistful , shy .
but where in the world is a pitcher like me ?
up rose the sheriff of mariposa .
in kindly fellowship with men ?
privileged to receive the personal ministrations of the saviour ,
and grief to the generations that die and spring again :
of old tom moone , thinking it best to keep
uneasy if he thinks there is any one uncomfortable about him . the
they shall train themselves to go in public to become orators and
hark , their hymns of glory pealing
granted by monarchs of some earthly throne ;
is a subject on which i could dwell ;
the wars that o'erhot knighthood makes
those dear imaginary sins ,
endless over - word that the scythe
is but a shadow in the gloom;--
lie wrapt in their blankets ,
ah , well ! ah , well !   i never question myself like dell ,
perhaps a longer stay thou wouldst have pardoned . "
perhaps it 's frogs or beetles , perhaps it 's
yours be the memory .
to true virtue . let the _ groggeries _ cease
the palm without the calvary ;
o ' mair nor thirty head ava ' ;
that , when , to - night , you saw the curtain rise ,
goth thurgh the large toun unknowe ,
must e'en be dear to a scotchman .
for ah ! the fate which blighted you
so he bought him another in santa fe .
said i , " but fear it not , king helge !
could slip with more address from harm than they
a threatening , unconquerable sea ...
and you bear us weal or woe !
spark was least distant ; i believe because it partakes more of
but his loving look ,
where are your eyes that looked so mild ,
filled me with the strangest thoughts .
went back on her four years ago ; his folks would not let him
---- the sibyl thus address’d
to do his holy will .
what good can come of hatred , greed and murder ?
for him who waits the reckoning , his accompt
soon all things will fade and be carried away .
blooms unapproached by sheperd or by flock .
fear forbade him touch the arrow
each , from far shores by wild winds brought ,
that foul polluted place .
sche prayed hur gentylwomen so free ,
words his mother learned in childhood ,
like to a falcon issuing from the hood ,
quelque chose qui ne nous plait pris entierement .
one beam of mine eye ;
said , ' it is good ;
in beams insufferable ,
that vapour dank , returning into water ,
to some friends on shore remaining ,
to him came támatéa , the basket slung in his hand ,
did the timber supply ,
dearer the ice - bound rills ,
why seem your courses quicker ?
after , this way return not ; but the sun
i turned . across the car were two young men ,
when the pie was opened
_ what healing in summer if winter be vain _ ?
wounds , that long hence may ask their spouses ’ care .
i find thee ; i am safe , and strong , and glad .
all was picture as he passed .
tandem liber equus , campoque potitus aperto
carystus and styra ; elephenor of the race of mars was in command
what hunter after secrets could find out ?
with fine small cords about it stretched wide ,
lavish regality
gleaming lilies bathed in moonlight
ramblings over english scenes .
a golden florin ; then withdrew ,
how to excuse them . my indulgence giv'n ,
its image takes an impress as a seal :
but isabella nobly put her watch and ring in soak .
y con él la grandeza ,
er the gobble - uns'll git you
hath never told
with doll in arms to court she came,--
and bright with the colours of even ,
ipse dies agitat festos fususque per herbam ,
romulae uoci decus adrogauit
a happier smile illumes each brow ;
then thus he spoke:-"stranger , tho ' new the frame
from all those flowers so fair and bright ,
dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart ,
of subtler essence than the trodden clod ;
in the brave days of old .
all vengeance , with no power to harm .
in our lord 's holy ground -- between the walls
but all too late -- and granted
i condescended to be pleased at last .
that when man offers , god well - pleas'd accepts ;
here of a sunday morning
grow torpid in the din of earthly strife .
life 's greatest joy is an accomplished care ,
at the accustomed hour !
... in still moonshine
and knew not quiet was the best .
on whom so rich a gift of god shall light .
by propagation to forge a progeny .
i come from school , there is no face
where late we thoughtless strayed ;
" summer , pray grant us
bringing rye in great abundance ,
gloss enough to furnish a noticeable contrast to the
from a high sál a branch he tore
and if she 's not gone she lives there still .
knew joy , or despair . "
tho ' it was sma ' , ' twas weel - won gear ,
and in his hand he bare a mighty bow .
o would beloved that you lay
" o _ lux _ dardaniæ , _ spes _ ô fidissima teucrûm . " quintus calab .
the beste goodes of the lond
the urchin slept ; and it was i
struck the deep sorrows of his lyre :
" so be thou pleased , my heart , " ( zerbino cried , )
i hear the rushing of a mighty wind
his iron gates and guarded wall ,
the minstrel 's response .
" ah , man,--ah , man ! ' twas my two hands
to se this olde ensamplerie ,
to make my shoulder and my bosom bare ,
from the field of his fame fresh and gory ;
artie argued matters with 'em , ' n ' he 'd kid
with all her queenly grace ,
shall break my sleep .
be thou my tree of life , my garden ground ;
love to his singer held a glistening leaf ,
it were yours to reach levels as high as i. "
her face unfurling like a flower
the worldly hope men set their hearts upon
and life -- one amber dawn 's delight--
and could the ceaseless vultures cease to prey[it ]
win not the soul entranced
my work is to watch the beautiful botch
so -- to the final fight ,
she fondly drew me nigh ,
thys dore , while i may stand . ’
wakes a dead soul to pain ,
i heard the pipes of pan !
mathematical professor ? "   i asked .
and make your care and sorrow less .
and when in turn he shot again ,
thee with his message ringing in thine ears ,
above heroic , though in secret done ,
now lest , my sone , and thou schalt here .
" two small mice ,
or by her side this breath and life to lose ,
by what our warrior wrought we hold him fast .
where rests the one god - given right
dear mother ida , hearken ere i die .
no , no ! from out the forest prance
from our immortal day .
blithesome hearts and willing elbows
and what 's dead ca n't come to life , i think .
had we arrived , and to the right hand turned ,
permission of the publishers .
what strains of vocal transport round her play ?
course of those years in which communion slept .
to those who gaze on thee what language could they speak ?
i struck him , and dismiss'd
on thy neck , a golden necklace ,
our verdant altars , and the victims blazed :
appeared unto them a horse , with a terrible rider upon him , and
olympia lap in slumber so profound ,
she 's dead and never married -- why not me ?
my shame so dead , mine honour is newborn .
impatience will forerun the sweet assurance
whatever should i do ?
nor couch our secretst loue in shew of hate :
du cygne , rose neigeuse , tu sais que la neige est
joy shall be ours when the warfare is over ;
_ { -but- } and where these are let no possessor fear _
finding excuse of no avail ,
thou hadst thine errands , off and on ;
then one , of all the locrians mightiest ,
ugolino , and as the leader of the pisan guelphs became his bitter
in englonde raynynge vnrightwisely a whyle .
i built my hut in a zone of human habitation ,
ye can never enter thereto
alas ! how he fumbles about the domains
ere they pass away ?
then let me rove some wild and heathy scene ;
in spring the flooded river meets the tide
and hear the whistle of the quail repeat
to reach the country of his birth again ,
paris , liberal principles safe as far away as , 422 .
to save all guess - work , just to tell ,
lord of rhine river . / now thyself mayst see
aught of his high emprise and ventures dear ,
its sorrow and undoing .
as we passed each other ,
_ cha . _ i can not stay ; more souls for waftage wait
' if i might see his face , and not be seen . '
i know not in whose hands are laid
and is unfetter'd , who shall place us there
as the drill is plugging downward at a thousand feet of level ,
bent down , as one who walks in reverent guise .
in a noiseless nest
note :   though written and engraved by blake , " a divine image " was
thy modest cheek aye mantling glows
with this he drives them down the stygian waves ,
with ardent speed forsake their deep abodes ;
where the race of men go by--
appear'd a mountain dim , loftiest methought
too great the bounty seems for earthly joy ;
much she sobbed , and much was sighing ,
the golden trophy on the furrow'd soil ;
fills my soul !
it seemed as if the earth would stay
what sayest thou ? what meanest by " like manner " ?
he lean'd , he look'd , there glisten'd bright
hailing the setting sun , sweet , in the green thorn bush ;
mary ! poor mary ! her sad mother cried ,
ca ' them where the burnie rows ,
and i hang my cage there daily ,
and if to - morrow -- who can tell?--
in this their false belief ; for them no fear
and e'en as dews of morning fill
but the coat hung the valet on a nail , and snatched up the cane .
the fallen , innocent till snared in sin 's duress .
but the memory of the strong man
on the pale showman reading from his stage
glitters and burns even the rocky base
  versibus exponi tragicis res comica nonvult
and shamed with rents from every wayside thorn .
and all ausonia had essayed in vain
he sows , he reaps the harvest 's gain ;
but tears fell o'er each tangled thread ;
both things to eat and things to see ,
through me you pass into eternal pain :
into another land , whose wealth , the while ,
in every great and little street ,
he 's always wantonly assailing
earth , and sky , and man unheeding that her joy had passed away .
at tellus ' pray'r devout , by the just doom
such joys the lonely heart may keep ,
who swiftly through the parting clouds descends
would i seek a larger benison
but when to merry feet
of velvet evenness , and hiding flowers
part of the mighty universal whole ,
oh , jock ! i doot i 'm rash to tell ye
“ i shar'd in hymen 's bonds . fierce wars alone ,
w cross'd th ' encircled mound in silence .   there
i wished the grass would hurry ,
and catch a gleam of the snowy sail ;
meet for rich abbeys .   from yon crumbling tower ,
humanity , and magnanimity .   how the attack was clandestine is not
and on each hand cypress and poppy sleeps ;
i rede , how whilom tuo ther were ,
but when a kindness you relate ,
leaving the courteous king , to england speeds ;
each drop that trickled down his body , there
shall drive---- unless my heart 's full raptures fail ,
and all alone went she .
as if our heaven and home were here ,
o , that i will , said she .
or the thrill of a virtuous kiss .
crowding too gladly into grass and leaves ,
to choose thee a fairer mate .
but , ah ! beyond the marsh you reach
whisper there was not , nor word , shadow nor showing ,
thou art a scholar , lycius , and must know
" but this i know , i fain would lay
beauties , like tyrants , old and friendless grown ,
the rantin ' dog the daddie o't
and i alone sit lingering here !
' twas once looke up , ' tis now looke downe to heaven . cr .
o miserable man ,
shines , veiled by change that ebbs and flows ,
but the gods wanted you ,
and in a deep sequestered dell
" maister , and i wil beyre myne ,
his hundred concubines .
to bless the sons of earth
his fiercest courage , till he push the greeks
never while the earth endureth ,
with these successes , and with them rejoyce ,
lord beichan turn'd him round about ,
is a misnomer .
the sun has set out yonder .
let it stand a week
and chased my love away . but ever thus
sat on his faded cheek , but under brows
and make her pryncesse of my detħ or lyf
at last to relieve us , when thought of the least ,
and as we ate , and rested there , we talk'd
i soon shall buy a snug wee cot ,
whose charms may their price in an honest way fetch ,
lo , what a marvel ( what rapture for him who first sung them )
tempering rude hearts with calm angelic force .
which yet join not scent to hue
these had wild forms and gaunt ; their dress was rude--
“ o welladay on the poor boors grey ,
in tears .
and lines of swaying elephants knelt down to
still must your hands withhold your loveliness ?
as o'er the brightest path below ;
the tails of both hung down behind ,
you curious chanters of the wood ,
whale bone and blubber monster size ,
and the sea said , " lo , i breathe ! but my breath
companions , and his mother who bore him and nurtured him ,
to respite his day - labour with repast ,
of his regret .   for we were still to learn
teach me the terms of silence , -- preach me
her lamb matured his lowliness :
o ! ' tis the first , ' tis flattery in my seeing ,
who said , " my dear fudge"--i forget the exact words ,
from his place rose hiawatha ,
queen of the world , supreme in shining arms ,
of our poet , ( see hell , canto x. 59 . ) had eclipsed the literary
unam cum jaceres : ita colles collibus ipsis
then his widow -- ay ! ay !
expression that is not proper to our language , and was probably
stretch'd in our palace , by these hands lie slain . "
thy hell ! from which thou hast stolen ! "
oh , how i long ' till he can walk ;
from getting at the letters .
" aias , men name thee mightiest man of all
i knows a tide , an ' it 's a good tide--
remitted .
and chiefs of ancient names ,
thus with refracted light before me seemed
go to your sculptur'd tombs , ye great ,
like us little girls and boys ?
you must have looked for some response ,
as the seed is within the banyan tree , and within the seed are
all night in the month of june ,
for the lips of no man uttereth love ,
i passed by that when i began ,
under him lay the golden moss ;
whereat the long - drawn grief of troy fell off from every mind .
that may recure my harts long pyning griefe ,
stands a thorough proof of our first assertion , that the
he looks into its knotted eyes
to slepes hous that sche schal wende ,
thy muse , that prostitute abandon’d jade ,
the friendless bard and rustic song
but i am quite forgotten
slumber holy , undefiled--
decree thy everlasting topic there ;
i lie in this damned cradle day and night ,
it 's the cussedest land that i know ,
and every year come in mair dear
whan they came to inglyswode ,
deciduous , and when now november dark
undertaking it , at the place and time , can only be reconciled by
have known thee ; for of all things human none
in ramsey , mahwah , suffern stand
and now the sun had stretch'd out all the hills ,
and the dials of the towers upon the shore ,
with the coral reefs behind ,
and i fancy that the teacher 's
the crimson , green , and yellow floss , that grew
brief was the flame of their life , but the lamps
that i again will woo--
whence came i ? whither am i borne ? what flight
or lastly , if your love is turned to gall
savings are squandered -- for the girls must dance ,
loved to rule and to lead .   she was eager to be
as that by eyes perceived within the light
what glories greet the morn !
europa ; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of
for know you not what curse of blight would fall
one private tom berry got into the hall ,
time does not count backward beyond
like deeds of arms through all the forts were tried ,
with the waft of the wavy stream .
was ordained me of yore .
the year 's end                timothy cole
and none may call his wealth his own ,
when softly upon it the gold light lingers :
and with these join that passionate zeal of love
so tender , and true , and sweet ,
this very town ,
syn dutch mynheer made courtship till her ,
and men may mingle for thee when they hear . "
silent , silent that moment bound ,
judicious wits spread wide the ridicule ,
she noted that the small irradiant wings ,
and filled the air with barbarous dissonance ;
and broke the chancel window - squares ,
they lay till woman came
seas from their flanks .
thunder , and lightning , and tempestuous fyre ,
william cullen bryant came of mayflower stock , his mother being a
truth without love were less than nought ;
herbarum subjecta potentia nobis .
paradise into the wilderness ; with a peculiar reference to eve 's
these wicked fiends the hermits kill —
and he is gane unto the bower
turned fiery red , sharpening in mooned horns
and olde eson gret joie made
suitors . she knew of the plot against telemachus , for the
are some folk driven here , and then all skill
punishment witness'd ,
da ziehn die stürme rings herum ;
and the voice of the turtle is dead in the soup .
que je vous sois à tous un être bienvenu !
having the gray gleam of steel ;
so at my master was i terrified ,
escaping with a few slight , scarless sneers .
in wonder , is the rescued cavalier ,
and safe with you for ever ?   you know all that ?
now go ; for at the door there waits
flowed rhythmic forth . the nobodies paraded .
o land he died to save ,
in seeds of laurel in the earth
and full of silver moons , that , as she breathed ,
we must give it voice and wisdom
and cool'd my throat with wine ,
perhaps , supported at another 's board !
an ' wonders if he goes a - courtin '
but him swift - footed achilles , answering , addressed :
not in vain had been his courage ,
has passion to beat bar ,
by a river , which its soften'd way did take
surrounds me , from the chearful waies of men
but all look'd up , where glorified anew
academy to improve and fix the english language .
for kindly deeds , in bosoms rude .
" and mutilate us with your walking - stick!--
and bear , with liberty and law , the bible in his
and so , by hoping more , they have but less ;
lulla , etc .
too well were all things going ,
gazing upon them , sleep overcame me , sleep which oft before a
as if to bar my gate ;
bid them back to the charge -- and the field is their own !
with rage of battle seized his bow .
added this law :
who passes for in life and death most lucky ,
leo the warrior , free from bondage base ,
when poets trample one 's front yard ,
all this i view,--a sight beyond compare
on christmas eve a christmas tale ,
the loss of dircé : argos amymoné :
as flying sunward oversea , to bear
and turn a cow upon it . see how nice
herodotus states the conclusion of psammeticus to have been
with glorious woman in its train ;
" my griefs not only pain me
or forto winne or forto lese ,
... of ancient love ,
thus the fair goddess : while endymion
has seen immortal actions done
a sudden raid from the hall !
who rules my hen - peck'd sire , and orders me .
descended downe for his euridice ,
ye rejoice together . now who thou wast may it please thee that i
make the canon highways roar .
and we arose , to see
give us this day our daily bread , and may our debts to heaven--
for when i ceased -- lo , as one newly dead
and " shiver my timbers ! " and other odd phrases
that bent like perfect steel to spring again and thrust !
you see they know i have n't had your name ,
tells that she hath not lived in vain .
expectant of the hour when you fulfil
all in this mottie , misty clime ,
condemn'd the best of kings ,
conceal the dark and envious thoughts they brew .
what ! do i hear thy slender voice complain ?
so for a while we talked and sung ,
in darkness like the day of doom ,
you may jeer at the absence of all technique ,
the varied voices , sounds athrough the air .
got a tongue dat jes run when it walk ?
while from its green shelter the oriole 's song
i needs must hurry with the wind
we are going to fight the yankees ,
albeit his joe seem saucy ,
of welding chance - divided loves , a link
the words of promise that he spake ,
did in the midst on airy columns stand ;
to execute my deeds .
kept secret from the fowls of heaven !
from emerald forest - pools , lance - like , thick rise .
this all - pervading , this all - conscious soul ,
i was woke from my dream by the voices and tread
when with the virgin morning thou dost rise , i. 159 .
but you may stay yet here awhile
that ye are kings . i 'll have no jealousies
stands at the prow , and guides them ; but astern
take me , paddy , will you now ? "
by work that lights the shapeless and the dun ,
would cool the fever in his brain .
ardise hills and newport coves
throws his weight upon his broadsword ,
if thou hast wit , and fun , and fire ,
" and the steed it shall be shod
ariel and arioc , and the violence
a dog in one illustration is accidental , and was not observed by
and laughs the immortal river still
till the south wind 's soft breath
pure and clear as morning - dew :
its fading defiance sounds in the umber and red of autumn leaves .
and laughed at her warnings , and spurned her command .
into the net , glad to get out alive ;
in starless nights of tempest crept the hag
and oft in private on their knees ,
quoted by cicero , says that philoctetes , while in lemnos , made
and knelt upon his knee .
like a child , in his arms ....
the second - sight of some astræan age ,
with a tall ship so doth a galley fight ,
fame , fortune , wealth , and liberty ,
because with those she loveth not to dwell ,
and as he turns to gaze upon the slain ,
first entered , strong menelaus followed then ,
i set a rose - bush .   " this , " said i ,
till the broad canvas vanish'd from the view .
we kep ' the dancin ' up tel four
go , dodderer , go
x    150 . st . stephen to his friends , to raise no monument   cl .
at last from dying men .
nor i , nor others , think me worthy of it .
strike flat the thick rotundity o ' the world !
yours truly ,
but come and grace my dying sight .
the object of her unremitting quest .
he stood unmoved , and watched intent
but life is marred , my soul to - day
would you know all his wisdom and his folly ,
and corn and rye : i wonder which will beat ?
on drowsy wing proceed ;
thus humbled in the dust , the pensive train
himself to quit at length this mountain - land ,
suppose the little cowslip
men that made a man of me .
the lower billows ; thundering down it sweeps ,
by these , good prince of merits high ,
that smiled on my early dream ?
and give to fame what we to nature owe ;
but on his policy his eye was lewd .
and a lone ship that rides there with the moon .
fool that i am ! i do recall
these sacrificial shades we bear
beautifully formed and colored ,
and though the itztli opens to the heart ,
ere i left the pasture bars .
they went forth to battle , but they always fell ;
the monster ceased : the princely pair
if there were other with me ; but perceiving
quaeque sub aestifluis thetis umida continet antris
the soaking rain too constant streamed ,
and catch a tit - bit in your skipping ,
german gives me a cold in the head , sets me wheezing
if there be truth or a scorn of greed ,
before your mother was born , the die of to - day was thrown
with its crystal pommel and golden guard ? "
reel , reel ,
drew a warm scent abroad ; behind the pines
and the music of the bleater .
began she , " peradventure , in this place
in battle terrible as blood - stain'd mars .
yet wouldst thou once , love , look unto me !
what seeks on this mountain
and pace the hollow rooms ,
" well i know the helm - director ,
and , dying , left to future times in trust
in sarraguce are beaten all the drums ;
where the wild geese hatch their goslings .
" descending hence unto the lowest powers ,
but if the pledge i gave thee i have kept ,
tak ' spear and tak ' sword ,
cheek o'er cheek , and with red so tender
you like to spy the buzzing fly in the other fellow 's honey .
and the purple sunset sets fire to the sky ?
inquires how he likes them . ]
that the tongue o ' man can name ?
where dishevelled trees
i dreamed i heard my dead love singing ,
when i all the lakes created ,
that , in a cloud imprison'd doth break out
draw his blue and humid eye ;
last wondrous sights of day -- god 's mysteries
and vice admired to find a flatterer there !
y sonando la trompa refulgente ,
_ i _ saw no heaven -- but in her eyes .
though every maid 's a lily - rose ,
in their deep glance ? i know whereof i speak ;
she did not make the least objection !
that for her lady many a blody wounde
sandalwood , cedarwood , and sweet white wine .
who in his head a fancy took
the phantoms ; but ere foot could climb the stair ,
choice of the nymphs whose looks will slant
see also psalm cxx . 2 .
for chance bits -- a comb
no color shoots into those cheeks ,
sweet youth ! since thee , of all mankind , i first
at thy approach the falling showres doe fly ,
his mind grew dim .
that you would think of lilies under glass ,
yea , ever there , each spectre hand the birth
his withered hands , licked by the tender
two paws it had , hairy unto the armpits ;
he must totter along to the bay .
but hold -- let me pause -- do n't i hear you pronounce
who after moves and governs it at will ,
in sloth 's unceremonious rags .
he to thy palace shall thy steps pursue ;
with a single arch , from ridge to ridge ,
and ask , if upward hence the passage lead . "
to the heights of world - wide fame ;
ye been to wys to do so gret folye ,
thee and thy suit , though told in moving tropes :
with cloudless lustre rose the sun ;
to taint his soul with foul religion .
in little baby bell .
a young sicilian , too , was there ;
now fierce marphisa , who was there , and prest
with its dark green leaves upon it ,
like a star glancing out from the blue of the sky !
the boat went drifting , uncontrolled , the rower rowed no more ,
for still my thoughts to do him grace are framed ;
this stern remembrance to his troops he gave :
comes gen'rally upon me , o :
in this wide world , my dear ,
say the bells at st . ann 's .
scratching his head ,
you work no miracle for me
though you smile and seem joyful , ' tis but to conceal
said love , the little admiral .
build me up of maple - trees a dwelling ,
“ at once , and pious : at the action stunn'd ,
residence , where this poem of homage was sung .
morn after morn , the long years through !
thus , thus we live , and spend the hours
and their sad spirits sank and fell ;
fulfilling some , in others he shall fail ,
blooming with roses , sent , somehow ,
and on three thrones there sate three giant forms ,
it ran in this wise:--_learned sir !
dries , its udder withers straight .
  _ with love 's fierce flames his frozen heart shall burn._--"it is
and distant pastures send the bleat
and ranks of men , and spears up - thrust ,
captives of a prison seed--
and he that of the black seed eateth fruit ,
could nowhere go .
once more the cauldron of the sun
" yet still we sail while prosperous blows the wind ,
faithless is earth , and faithless are the skies !
spring in his bosom , finding e'en thus soon
and tried to fight it off till noon -- no good .
sings a third from dawn till evening ,
crying , leap from your seats and contend for your lives !
that they were strangers to her / did grieve her heart full sore ,
a portion of the pains that her torment ,
" how pleasant to know mr . lear ! "
be fair ; nor of his elders yet can deem
proud little heart !
assistance at thy bath to lend . ”
a carriage for one went through the street ,
but peering in earth 's entrails , where the gnome
the wave awakens rolling images of soft embraces ;
with flowers and wine their genius they adored ;
with satan , hee who envies now thy state ,
" no need thy will be told , which i untold
that all both judge you to relate them true ,
' tis said , as passports into heaven ;
it wrought no evil : there , with force and lies ,
should green them gay with waving leaves ,
is báli ’s heart ; and then decide .
an ' ' e ' asn't no time for to sit an ' think ,
buggy , " he says , " and claybank mare ? "
“ but from the flowers red flowing drops i saw ,
let us smile for the sake of it .
the wound of the illustrious hunter bold ,
how quiet they breathe , the little children in their cradles .
consiliis animum fatigas ? '
is as the bird that bites a bee ,
and at last came the voice , imperative , questionless , certain .
' is this for love , or love for this ? '
when in their filthiness they stand confessed .
that best deserves to fa ' that ?
came through the lattice bars
river circles through the meads ,
and the mother 's soft lullaby breathed it in song .
words such as these gave honour to the shade
made clothing of its skin , necklaces and bracelets of its teeth ,
the laurel crown lies leafless there !
he . and you think so still ?
i have taught ever in the synagogue ,
the triumph 's lengthening pomp exalts thy soul ,
and what hast thou , whose father driven forth
turns him to the east — the sun ’s uprising —
or how a miser 's ghost , with grisly beard ,
a man of hih complexioun
for the blue had all come off their clothes ,
in the first age , the early prime
and so with a rattle we march to the battle ,
ages go over him .   at last , at last
in the heart 's depths a peace serene and holy
he sang a song so sweet , so tender true ,
la cumbre azul de un monte ;
but he bailed her out with his colon - bell ,
adieu ! a heart - warm fond adieu ;
saw his dear brother helpless lie ,
that spreadeth over all ,
to the heathen songs they sung--
red , blue , and white , and green and gold ;
of sheep and men of gentle will .
i knows a town , an ' it 's a fine town ,
' fore long the trees begin to show belief ,
do in spare hours more thrive than i that spend ,
stared from the woeful head that seemed a mask
how we may best forget .
in his grasp he seized the maiden ,
its leaves have shed or bowed the stem ;
my gladness keepeth me concealed from thee ,
as if his hand were laid upon the veil
ran'lagh , st . pimlico .
there , at the head of a green pool and deep ,
my guide , because there was no other shelter .
for so it seem'd,--than till that day
he amply does his benefits afford ,
in hopes that her anguish of mind it might lessen .
a bluebird has a back " like a feathered sky . " apostrophizing a
" where have you come from ? " said i.
all eagerly the boy
still radiant and undarkened in the dark ,
to the clash of golden cymbals , while there crept
the sinner is won through his heart , not his mind .
again so sweet a time ,
the doctor ne'er was heard to chide ,
i love him and he loves me , holy father .
my wawst feaws are wealized ; the op wa is na maw ,
and the holy father coming
agatha , see thy part
to ashes all will fall ;
and yet some lamps in jove 's high palace shined ,
a little thing may harm a wounded man ;
but nothing sad said she :
“ oh , pale you are , and full of prayer
upon the latine coast herselfe to reare .
though sacred to her love , how deck'd
( for ah ! a neighbour 's woe excites our fear )
at the songs of the magician .
the lamb agen the old ewe stops ,
and the next day makes the handle ;
less prudent ; nimble ladas was less fleet ;
such days the world ,
my good - will is sisterly :
whose nimble waves upon the starry night
all of the joy of the world in the innocent heart of a maiden .
compared unto the sounding of that lyre
very soul of life to save ,
thus , and thus it now appears
i slipped a coin
" the fault was in me :
far to the north , through bluish vapour breaking ,
so he smote before , in such a peril ,
who vindicates a moment , too , his stream ,
and drew a burnish'd brand ,
with that the furious wolfhart had leapt upon him fain ,
when he grew melancholy , they said , " his name 's polly , "
and if i failed to climb the dizzy height ,
wisdom - bard , and magic singer ,
which was destroyed by sylla in the social war . it was afterwards
and indicate her all my woes ,
his age forbids : nor on the cunning moor ,
side by side !   though the king has his way ,
there form'd his empire ; there his palace rose .
that rack'd me all the time--
translator .
bravely , and wrote that " to be brave and not
in tongues of a twilight race ,
quietly knitting ; one eye cast
straight for a priest the mother sent ,
" and be as i am , great among mankind ! "
than these weak ministering words have spell to prison
couldst thou not hold time back , and send
o'er the man 's temples fell the snows of age ,
the old , old king of cumberland
and though i knew this day had in its giving
scares the shy fawn , so with that faintest sound
she rul'd whole states and armies with her voice .
to disentangle one clear wish
fair maiden , to requite you well .
moving along a tract of morning shade ,
lie in the street , in houses lie , lie round the holy doors
there was a little girl ,
held in the kitchen , while the two conferred ,
they first charged me with disorderly conduct ,
to offer the stamp of the very guelph .
i wrote thee on my shield ,
then memory , like the nightjar on the pine ,
dream of the gods who died in nero 's day ?
he has led his armies on ,
why is it that genius perplexes and troubles
my wedding hour , by standing as best man .
i leant out over a ledging cliff and looked down into the sea ,
whispering , " sleep on sorrow 's bosom ,
yet , can i not to starry eminence
and foul corruption of the time ,
in truth you 'd find it hard to say ,
a girdle ' round the narrow sphere
thus , huge seems tree or man ; and everything
lagrimosas de amor dulces querellas
one moment lives that melancholy trance--
' e do n't say nothin' : goes on baggin ' spuds .
" blue , " answered dell .
where woeful and bewildered ( for to sight
to so young and wild a swain?--
goes down with a great shout upon the hills .
tall rocks of ice refract the coloured rays ,
' tis here that roams ,
can ever quite repeat the past ,
that mar the noblest enterprise ,
if death do strike me with his lance ,
thei granten wel that he schal wende
when she said to cyrus , " for blood thou hast thirsted , and with
the body 's habit wholly laudable ,
when watchmen , conscious of the day
may these endure and , as his work , attest
met sophy on the green .
that i can not yield my power to please these foolish flowers . "
is one who pipes a deathless tune--
to yon sweet dwelling above grassmere vale ,
that helps a poor man thru ;
the beggar laughed . free winds in haste
" fear not , for we pay our debts . "
and bloodying the plain . here sight and speech
thus hand in hand and side by side ,
now through the friendless world we fare
i have recoiled before a challenging glance ,
sin ' then , i ' all mah conflicts heer ,
out of the mission of san luis rey ,
the foeman , speeds the conqueror on its wing ;
with the crucifix he wore compelled my gaze .
thanks , william , thanks ! thy love has joy ,
the wives of ilium range about with due dishevelled hair ;
they bow , catch hands , with never a word ,
that made her lover love her so ,
raptures , despairs , and deathless ecstasies ,
to lift my eyes to hers ,
whan ther was noght bot sterreliht ,
why should men make haste to die ?
where faith and love and hope are dead indeed ,
he dressed himself in cycling clothes , resplendent to be seen ;
that goes to the wood ?
production ; hence the two musical times or bars ; and hence
for her sake that died for me .
with rage , comes pyrrhus . lo , in act to aim ,
black piles of stones which yesterday were homes ;
and his throne a sea of splendor .
with reverence meet the baron low inclined ,
and courtiers hunt them , though they bray .
whaur wide spreadin ' hawthorns , sae ancient and hoary ,
ah ! the heart was where the treasure ,
to blest arabia 's distant ground ,
chased his ill race , and seized his royalty ;
_ it was the time when england 's queen
blaspheme our nature . it is through you , julia ,
noosed his reluctant neighbours in :
from the elements of fire and earth and water ,
nurses her store , with thine to blend
rivers of silver , mines of copper ore ,
for the race is run by one and one and never by two and two . "
the ferryman exhausted sank
one since hath quench'd the other ; and the sword
¡ qué rápido torrente ,
and the little path along the house is still .
precipitate , unhurt , accosted earth .
and sítá , none to guard her side ,
a useful part that sent an invitation
what fate decreed , time now has made us see , ii . 66 .
what sunbeam so bright as thine own smiling eye ;
there , in that narrow room , they saw his face
furnish support to any,--nay , it must ,
so dutch mynheer was wooing at her ,
under an osier growing by a brook ,
and over there , beyond ,
now , all united in a goodly team ,
leave cold the night , how we his gathered beams
right
from all the streets of troy the trojans flocked
o quantum est hominum beatiorum ,
we creep in and out
to hear the woodland pilgrim 's knell .
sate confident and fearless ,
on the poet 's age ;
the hearing gave new pleasure to the sight ,
is this the love , is the recompence
when day withdraws but half its lights ,
the dancing feet in babylon , of those who took my floor .
and venus laughs to know one knee will bow before her still .
that the barley well may flourish .
having jesus , those have i.
northward in the summer night .
from the flashings of the lightnings ,
and exclaimed , " oh , base man ! you might well flee with shame !
to prove himself the master .
where much of them he makes .
and destroy the fish unhappy ? "
vnto no gretter , this mighty god so faste
he tracked a yearling bear and made his kill ;
can such a foot explore
who gives to whom hath naught been given ,
“ great joy and mighty fame are mine
by which dreams pass , penelope replied .
procul a mea tuos sit furor omnis , hera , domo :
to - morrow to fresh woods , and pastures new .
she has graz'd my side ,
as alu{m } & alkaran , þat angré arn boþe ,
fleetly rushing through the door - way ,
with leap and spring they bound along ,
were suspicious . most suspicious
for highest good , vain is our strife ,
and this wur a fact this wur th ’ railway they saw ,
with thrusts like lightning - flashes .   his great heart
of harlots , loveless , joyless , unendeared ,
this wants an eastern , that a western , wind :
that poor little pitcher would gladly have flown ,
the hag , who the approaching warrior knew ,
from hasting unencumbered to her goal .
the grasses ' delicate sheaves,--
say very often to myself , ' alas !
you fellows that are in -- have a heart for those
" to kings nor to their kinsmen shall never more betide
yet not with brawling opposition she ,
and yet no critics praise the urchin 's ' art , '
to imprint a kiss that lacked not power to spread
let me not creep
at once lay leveled low ;
that hére pérsonal tells off these heart - song powerful
the convoy spread like wild swans in their flight ,
on either side wav'd , and thus breath'd at last :
they to the hermit ’s son replied :
you must bear all the venom of his tooth !
i kin see the honeysuckle climbin ' up around the mill ,
at the red boat 's side they heard it ,
o gracious city well - beloved ,
added entrancement each succeeding mile .
we were to meet at three , is it quite that ? "
i 've left you , p. , my whole ms . ,
on a third is money forging ,
yet i state but the facts ;
milton , in which the phrase " living death " occurs .
but now when seven are out you come between .
they 'll sit or lig upon ther deead ,
what ! from his helpless creature be repaid
why toil ye to ensure illusions vain ,
the silk - worm broods in countless tribes above
all my hopes on thee i found ,
' twould go to the priest , as did the other .
dance the romalis in the market - place ?
his frame by strong convulsion torn ,
upon the graves of those we loved some forty years ago .
some devilish escapade or stir , which shows
that poor pathetic locket , and her way
this garden , still to tend plant , herb , and flower ,
approaching , he cries out joyfully to him :
dear my land of gwent : _ o quam dilecta tabernacula _ .
when you comin ' down ?
and the water round and o'er them
one rose on my bower , one rose
the tale of love some other tongue must tell ,
the merry time there lasted / until two weeks were spent ,
i think the inspiration for this must have been c. 8 .
she is my brother 's daughter ; he and i
with something in their shoes much worse than gravel ;
johnny , how dost thou now ?
it was intill a pleasant time ,
silence imposed upon my eager mind ,
yet pure in manners , and in thought refin'd ,
" sweet voice but his own is worthy to wake him . "
then , a little sad ,
flowers of her hair with her necklace entwined ,
above , gilded lightning
to conquer , if they durst assail .
if she be ailing -- why she has not come
with shining falchion in my chamber came
that sails upon the sea !
yes ! both the pulpit and the press ,
nay , let this earth , your portion , likewise cover
ocean and earth and heaven was jubilee .
" what play - hours in one week have done ;
useless it lies upon the plain ,
the maiden fair ,
far stouter heart than mine he 's got
his gun beside , the jungle round him -- wild ,
more pleasing by their being all complete ;
and spotted with all crimes ; in whom i see
till time has struck the letters of one word--
but the third one in the gloom
she wrote :   ' we have him half by theft . '
my one sweet child , whom i shall see no more !
i mind me now that once i heard
still in summer 's rose unshown :
fall , how profound ! like lucifer 's , the fall !
'' _ faut tout souffrir pour etre veau _ ! ' )
and stay his rage to slay . " take ye no thought , " said he ,
like a dingo pup , if he saw the chance ;
oporto 's wine that drives the fever out ,
so famous have dishonoured , and two crowns .
quarum sacra fero ingenti percussus amore ,
words that were wing'd as her sparks in eruption ,
in the first white days of the world ,
and one as well a vessel might advise
i 'm sure we should all be as happy as kings .
los florecientes días ,
whilst the ladies lov'd him the more for his scorn ,
fifth day , from kalmannstunga to
i 've a vow in the heaven , i 've an aith wi ' thysel ' ,
for you confuse my life with memories
dei were their exordiums : one word there was in all , and one
criminibus , tacita sulant praecordia culpa . "
she goes , the king awaits her from the camp :
through many a gaping seam lets in the baleful tide .
hath baffled all ; to rule , himself , supreme
they met at autumn dusks and winter daylight - ends .
the small apparent quantity of matter that exists in the universe
to the music from the forest ,
now the wintry winds are gone ,
by love 's sad harvest garnered in the spring ,
nor saw the suzerain whose shaft
the word spoken yesterday night ?
is torn and stained with sand ,
uriel .   [ percy mackaye ]
caressingly she bends and kisses them
and when their upturned faces lay at rest
waiting without stood sparrow and crow ,
the food for living things to taste ,
betwixt ausonia 's and sicilia 's land .
comes round the age of gold ;
  _ some deem the warrior of hungarian race._--see the note on the
was found within ; some blushed and hung the head ,
they oft fore - signify and threaten ill .
and pu'd the gowans fine . "
for that like it her blush is beautiful
like the sun , thy presence glowing
yes , even now i wonder why
and on a foreign shore ; where strangers wept !
may be conceyled from your pryuete
skurf by his nine - bones swears , and well he may , 390 .
to the loved ones left behind them .
whereon the blessed baby lay ,
or pains his head :
douglas , douglas , tender and true ?
the sunbeams love to seek ;
singing thine immortal song .
the letters of corinne , the telephone
and round her all her noblest dying in vain ,
follow , follow , gathering flock - wise
and night droops low her sable plumes
’ tis not that i blame your getting
shall watch with open silver wings ,
and fill'd my bosom . oh , i have endured
then frose , my isicles , not sinews shake .
but i was timid . oh , my love was such
the kingdom of his mind to those
becomes a ruined chateau , the grey street a demolished village .
a good man never dies .
if you are anything the wiser at the end ! _
" o thou smith , o ilmarinen ,
no hè menestèr ni armàs ni cabàllo ...
he seemed indifferent to the world , the kind that does n't care--
ay truly ! that is just the proper tone !
showing how vanity is still on deck ,
before the breath of life to him was given
he saw her trembling by his side ,
then of this path thou wilt have reach'd the end .
not with the bellow of guns and not with sabres whetting ,
fearless he was beyond credence , looking at death eye to eye :
why , the old king 's friend
ours with all her youth and promise , ours with all her strength
just lightly spoon the flour into the measuring cup and
a better shote in mery carlile
tall giraffes , and cedars brought
neglected not the sacred claim .
their ravelled buds , and wrinkled cups unfold ,
whose ready tongue himself can praise ,
she walks without hood
with heavily powdered hair .
enkindled by thy sacrifice for me ;
when round the barque the billowy wave
was as long as hand of woman ,
and flung him dead , as well or ill may prove .
and e'en the rude bucket that hung in the well--
you waved , nay , kissed your hand to me . "
lays forth its gradual blooming , redolent
the moonlight shone on cabbage walk ,
on whose wise rede the king relied ,
on ending silences the knight ; and he
when i do exercise . "
as we .
deputed from what firmament
to unite correctness of design ,
if given , by whom but by the king of kings ,
with shipwrack 's toile , oh , that is sweet ,
and sunk tail , and horrible heave of the flank ,
and"--her clear glance fell , and her cheek grew red--
leave me till broad daylight -- you must not ! "   i
its owner absent , and untried so long .
photograph from an ambrotype , by gilmer , illinois , 1858 ]
whilst thine the victor is , and free !
two happy farmers , learned in love 's lore ,
my royal roof with flames is red ,
who never did anything properly ;
write a nation 's curse for me ,
sounded the tread of marching feet :
with the rest , scolding wives let poor cuckolds appease .
no ! yonder sparkle is the citadel 's
si j'ai parlé
on st . john 's eve .
a stranger too ! " " fair lord ! " quoth saladin ,
and grandsons of the might of hercules .
_ ah , sweet love , i have thee now ! _
thus on a roe the well - breath’d beagle flies ,
tell him for coral thou hast none ,
swam the fish in all directions ,
by rolling plain and rocky shelf ,
exchange your lovers , if ye will ,
a wanton goat to every stormy power,[b ]
erin , thy silent tear never shall cease ,
the knights were busy tilting with good success or ill ;
affirmative , negative what in love 's ear?--
viewed from a pullman sleeper .
the message of april to may
or spread with vernal blooms the purple heath?--pope .
mee thus , though importune perhaps , to come
the lily 's singing seneschal
then , home through the poplar - wood ! damp across our faces
why laugh ye ? that ye blew your boast in vain ? '
we shared our studies and our play ,
look ! look ! there is another clad in gray !
here at an outpost , here is my patrol duty :
fine leather and best camel hair ! "
red as her lip , ravished the soul away .
the darkness of my dim abode
and therein do they shine .
to hoarce or mute , though fall'n on evil dayes ,
as little wolff , running down to learn the meaning of his aunt 's
they could not know our true and deep farewell
ting ! ting ! the bells ring ,
accept , saint stephen , to thy praise
the neck of a sleek , well - fed mastiff dog ;
all with gay garlands goodly well beseen .
as it ran light , or had to bear a load .
john anderson , my jo , john , vol . i. , 155 .
at distance i gaze and am awed by my fears :
because that i welth hath great porte
and often i cry
of all ' is five years ' schoolin ' they do n't remember much
( though she called it her love ) , and declared her life blighted .
wi ' the shaking o ' their pocks .
weeping i give thee my sceptre and crown ;
caring nought to be recorded on the muster - roll of fame ,
with error in ambition justly charged ,
“ low lies proud iliüm , and the public woe ,
hath tarried now full seven years in spain ,
it was a thing set up by a king ,
stood manifest to view .   incontinent
leaning in the grass !
for that 's as true as thy dissembled fears
their curious epitome ,
does god forget the daisies
bend your proud neck low for once , young libertad .
and three useless arrows only ,
or on his brow be set the heroes ' thorny prize .
to a love - feast we both invited are :
on this eventful day .
for the love my heart has for her like a slow consuming fire ;
but now i see _ sir jeff'ry _ enter ,
that you and your love were plighted ,
and his bridle hangs in stall .
and she nested them close to her warm feathered side ,
an awful darkness resteth
we must not perish in the wintry blast--
quickly rushed he on his victim ,
his eyes a shade turned on me , and looked keenly ;
would none of meat or drink , nor clasped him round
" hold we our hands , for dawn our foe hasteth the world to touch :
any thing to each other . i one day reproached him with idleness ;
you 're the son of my brother who died--
de su perfidia y dolo ,
here i come tripping it over the snow ,
frowns o'er the oak wood 's summer state ,
and guide thee surely to thy journey 's end ;
and show what seems a slender piece of metal
there 's the mossy situation ;
the seat of arts , of science , and of fame ,
by foreign hands thy decent limbs composed ,
imperfect some , their bodies wanting limbs :
but as hir man i wol ay live and sterve ,
and hush ! a light breeze stirs the tree ,
oh tunbridge ! and your springs ironical ,
a glittering palace rose , with mailed men
too long it were to tell thee all his merits ,
it is that weariness which springs
and yield such piercing pain they ca n't hold out
sail forth into the sea of life ,
where he his oghne body lay ;
to testify his hidden residence .
now lies the earth all danae to the stars ,
and she stirred great pots of porridge ,
when she came back
golden tresses , damp and bright ;
unused to courtly speeches , and they say
eurypilus : so sings my tragic strain ,
of strength superior to the toil design'd--
at these stones , why
how he will laugh outright
speaking fluent words and holy ,
to see thy arch thus stretch and bend ,
or mine , which likes the world , takes all for granted ,
  the old corrado malaspina was the husband of constance , the
white his raiment , from his shoulders
and all that in it lies
lovers , pianos are the self - same thing ;
flung back the challenge in the braggart 's face ,
( hey , and the rue grows bonnie wi ' thyme ) ,
it will be so -- ah , so it is not now !
' tis no forest in the distance ,
and thick trees shade the grassy ground .
and horrid paws and monstrous head of bear ;
who has a guitar ;
oh , carry me , waggons , oh , sailing - ships , help me depart !
be lost to human eye among the bowers
still let me say : no follower , but a friend .
i dare not ask a kiss , ii . 35 .
and ye , who talk of glory and renown ,
it is his nature,--
of earth without a face . so let me be . _
tongue be clever ,
oh dear , lackaday , oh ,
was low in a happy place to let us cross ,
a woman and a man ,
is it not mixed into thy common air ?
relations of words to one another ) are all that i have allowed
since we have entered in within the gate
are notice takin .
so thick a haze o'erspreads the sky ,
ulysses ' heart dilates with secret joy .
possess a long description of the church of saint sophia by him ,
my arm is nothing weak , my strength is not gone by ;
kabîr says : " touch his feet , who is one and indivisible ,
when we get there it 's ' most sure to be fine ,
star - memories of happier times ,
she beats her breast , and rends her yellow hair ,
while the maid prepared the bath - room ,
for thy purpose thou hast made .
the bold they kill , th ' unwary they surprise ;
yet are sweet faces flinging
until the clouds , robbed of their tinted light ,
swords that are with slaughter wild
at their left hand down went they from the height
nor drunken victory , with a nero 's mirth ,
the finger lifted .   if , o reader ! now
and then shall be heard and feared no more
this dreadful foe will soon no more
stiffed within , the impetuous sorrow stays ,
he strove still onward , weeping , gaily ,
to violate its laws in her sore need ,
in rosy bliss
_ mary . _ and so you may .
oh , but life went gayly , gayly ,
covered with your arms the awful stream , meted the sea - streets ,
and all hearts do pray , " god love her ! "
sure never host yet feasted such fatal guests as these . "
standing few paces distant , cast it down
sweet pertaters frum de patch ,
where the curlews cried ;
may hear , if he lists aright .
at morning in the dark i rise ;
facete , comis , animo iuuenali senex ,
" sing ! " said the baby .
youth 's ill wedded with despair ;
and me , all so hungry for crumpets and tea .
instance , aggrievedly attacking the little fellow 's
“ with a vain hand i strive to gird the curb ,
that on the sovran pleasure he may gaze .
as a husband or parent but few did excel .
i saw a novel writ by bertha clay ;
whose steps , aspiring , mar your summits chaste !
in a slave are not to be forgiven in a tyrant ; although redeemed
as though to win her sight .
fulfilled of good things ,
' tis only a ghost of a christmas past .
while through my top the breezes played .
and the ironwork was gleaming ,
the motorist would fain have driven me to my house ,
with _ hard hattes _ on thaire hedis hied to thaire horsis . ”
our only son fell , oh , all our future !
as a school - boy 's paper kite .
for ráma and his wife ordain
lincoln monument before it was reconstructed .
for , where yon groves the gradual hillock shade ,
flowers of the sky ! ye too to age must yield ,
" with thoughts that ever range above the skies ;
thou wilt not cease to love me well ,
car la fiancée est venue
water - brides , he spies a fifth - one ,
i too severely dealt . "   sudden that sound
high on his car the giant rose
" to you , in david 's town , this day
in human ways ; and much of false and vain ;
of the garden beds
to ward away the battle stroke ,
as the tribute of holmes to the grand _ marseillaise _ .
yet knew they fell .   and " ah , " i said , " not puppies ,
said , " i will quench it in the martyrs ' blood
even as death , beside her blood - dark seas ,
essence threefold and one , mysterious league
or let the lively , thrilling blackbird 's song ,
and an infinite combination grows .
clean lopt away ; a spectacle like this
an ' only yesterday i ' ears
on life 's rough ocean luckless starr'd !
electricity into your walls .
the lilac to the brier ,
' _ o god , deliver thy people . let thy sword
the grace , whence true love lighteth first his flame ,
back to the old , old homestead!--isn't it queer !
give me but back my walter 's love ,
an she bad him mind on the ladie 's love
one or two stared the captives in the face ,
incredible how swift , had thither rolled
arm - in - arm with oaks and larches ;
with his overcoat he cometh .
the dane his woful tale had done , when thus
good sense , tabooed all imagination and described in
woven of asters and of autumn leaves ,
with al myn herte i you beseche .
the _ templar _ wisely does his care enroll ,
he answered : " brother dankwart , / now take thy stand before ,
` save them from this , whatever comes to me . '
a score of hardy pioneers trudged down
that dearly loves the gleam of sails ,
and nothing here have power to move
from the forbidden space his men retir'd .
which to preserve they have in trust .
only you have attained , waning moon .
and love your neighbour as yourself !
meseemeth erewhile was i born .
how a small dusk crawls on the village
troy never wronged ; i came not to avenge
prone on the bare earth in dismay .
( not the less precious or true ) !
pull him not from his den , but from his throne .
grow gods ; alas and , with it , men are wanting !
her upright body could so stand . )
he woke to hear his sentries shriek ,
a land of blackened barns and empty byres ;
content indeed to sojourn while he must
no man , i think , could listen long
nine months he waited till le verrier , too ,
and , lifeless , bring to royal priam 's town ,
" come , step it , forty - eight ! "
for beneath the clouds o ' dew , where'er my path may be ,
now i 've had my lazy supper , and the level sun is gleaming
the birth of this our heavenly king ?
e'en then , a wish , i mind its pow'r ,
and timid glances shy ,
that thou to - day shalt find .
mars fiery - helm’d , the laughter - loving dame ,
here from the shore by rolling earthquakes hurl'd ,
went where it was thin--
unity of life , and when it ends it ends for ever .
aunque oymos y leymos
sin leads the way , but as it goes it feels , ii . 200 .
touching , though slightly , on the life to come .
the rose , through all this garden - land ,
oh , there 's glory for you here--
and lov'd its solitary joy ;
the issue of the bloody fray ,
and yellow streaked with brown .
o’er many a league of road had sped ,
dreams serpent - shapen , such as sickness weaves ,
but we knew the work they had been at
of what i see well - formed or hear well - tuned ,
from ruined pansy - beds
and how a joint of english meat should
the sad arcadians , from th ' unhappy field ,
looks of rejoicing love , of pride , of happy trust !
quam regere imperio res velle et regna tenere .
is flashed from out the precincts of the tomb .
by their blest memory 's led .
moving the sea - flowers in those purple caves
constrains me to continue with a sequel ,
as o'er the moss with playful glide
the dog stood on his head .
of my injustice aggravate the load
i can not tell ; i wish i could ;
heavens .
when the shadows stir and start ,
on brakes of roses when the roses fade :
the west is tired of thin and icy - cold spirituality , and seeks
singleness of heart and purpose we advised the argives how all
but the host he grinned and he shook his head ;
i 'm going to the meadow
and to the right hand turning , other care
which cures the ill of life .
for evere i schal be war therby :
with the long , clear note of the hunting - horn ,
on his high throne of prideful authority ,
and euer thought that in his furiousnes
of matilda and alfred -- the boy lying there
with dust dishonour’d , and deformed with gore .
llevaba y con noble brío
so rolled a gulf between us -- deep and wide--
quien hubiese tal ventura ?
and still fought on by hafed 's side ,
nor half the punishments those crimes have met .
had not taught me its a b c ?
faces of children as stars unknown of , spheres
not one more bolus shall be given--
and changede al hire ferste entente ,
( another meadow has yet to be mown
a dragon 's fiery form belied the god ;
ingathered self that made her night .
such the bard 's prophetic words ,
round castled piles for which the forest fell ,
the ills which they may not undo .
with blinded eyes ; their idol , gold ,
he next his words address'd : " we pray ye tell ,
and clap a white cape on their mantles blue ;
tearing up trees both root and branch ,
the hop of a stoat , a buck that thumped ,
from arno 's banks to bacchiglione , where
this is the country faith
for love still reigns within thee strong ,
upon this faire deianire ,
so i peeled myself a birch - shoot ,
or hunted by the red pursuing dawn ,
in hyde 's fertile vale , beneath the feet
quick guha hastened to produce ,
& fast aboute schal i fare yo{ur } fette wer waschene ;
and feird at britains throne ?
and when the weak protection seek
on the top of a mountain i stand ,
first monas moves , an unconnected point ,
when will the world shake off such yokes ? oh , when
and midmost of the murderous water 's web
low - minded , stubborn , fraudulent , remiss ,
every leaf that shone ;
with all thine honours , thou of caesar 's rage
the fault admits of no defence ; for wheresoe'er ' tis found ,
the last fond hope i leant upon ,
the ocean is the element .
goosey , goosey , gander , where dost thou wander ?
and moves on his people his word to fulfill ;
" oh fie ! oh fie ! " was now the cry ,
over me lifts the peat - reek
winsome one , who art renowned above all others , i plead for your
such was thy wisdom , newton , childlike sage !
half - a - crown is stopped out of your wages !
wrong'd love , spoil'd hope , mistrust and ageing fears ,
peace dies like twilight bleeding on the hills ,
monsieur the curé down the street
from bed to bed , from one to other border ;
sometimes , to make him wish it were not his ,
de sinsabores -- ajeno el pecho ,
so from the horn that to the right extends
blamed by some ; by others praised ;
yet , trembling , still i dare not to be mute .
the night cloud is hueing ,
of my own dear fatherland .
his pavilion is around me ,
of god 's white sisters of the virgin 's veil .
ere in themselves they are , fixing thine eyes
still before him rose the billows ,
samuel is forever talking of his elm--
deeming the reachless near;--the prophet race
nay , this i 'll say , in others ' breast ,
to wake with warmth and nurse with dew
when plato was a certainty .
o'er the empty silence of the main !
( i 've kissed--'gainst rason an ' ' gainst rhyme--
and ever after , on that fatal day
that little cage i would not part ,
one small , year - old infant then hangs at your breast ,
and left light stricken into gloom--
said he .   " behold a ruin who meant well . "
made haste from the bottom
lost the prize that paris gave ;
that man is lordly , that man gazed upon
own , if again thou know'st me .   thou wast fram'd
concurred not to my being , it were but right
come to my longing arms and let me prove
by lot my habitation was assign'd ;
a curtain of orange velvet hangs in stiff folds ,
he stuck to me through thick and thin , jack dunn of nevertire .
this singular law not even kings were exempt .
thus from a single stock the double stems unfold .
of plans and castles , hopes and dreams and fears .
let the dream pass , the fancy fade !
alas , alas , oh golden eyes ,
passion with peace , and show desire at rest,--
the old oaken bucket , the iron - bound bucket ,
when winds go round and round in bands ,
and you were a sky - blue square .
if he whose bosom with no transport swells
of all the world : the churning blood , the long
in you i knew the sweet contentment of the world ,
" to root from earth the accursed sorcerer race ,
ere i go hence , know this from me ,
the light and luminous balloons
with steady arm the string he drew
suppose her insincere , it was no lie
o farther , farther , farther sail !
we subjects ' liberties preserve
others , for it is i who am master here . "
" o thou smith , o ilmarinen ,
and then more vivid was my power of sight
some phantom lures , such as we sought at first--
disappointment gathers fast ,
alas !   they never had thy hate :
in a clay - cottage , by each blast control'd :
of his hand is a thing to bet on , and the undue
if thou canst death defy ,
now do not stare,--for so do i :
o'er which the full - orb'd shields of tough bull's - hide ,
that for his love to them
for his very strength he loved him ,
their consecrated spears lay scatter’d round ,
methinks hereafter in some later spring
soon as they had had enough to eat and drink penelope said :
celestial blue ,
the bellows keep on croaking .
and jove himself , the sire of men and gods ,
he came -- but anger so deform'd his eye ,
my heart is failing .
breeds crudeness , and will not digest .
life is the body 's light ; which , once declining ,
lo ! some we loved , the loveliest and the best
like mothers ' breasts , to bid it feel
but he whose succour then not first i prov'd ,
i leaned my back unto an aik ,
for puppies like you there 's but few ,
and living god will never bend the knee
who presently starts up and sighing deep ,
and hypanis and dymas , matched in might ,
that there was not one faulty spot a critic could have found .
for all around appear'd to burn and glow .
cease to tell of any more compare ,
bid mary heap the fire with coals .
fair daffodils , we weep to see
" dog , dog , bite pig ;
nor mine , i was a new - made wife
and on the grekes ost he wolde see ,
if , dear anthea , my hard fate it be , i. 11 .
deep in whose hearts , as on his brow ,
of fog o'er hill and valley ;
he feels it yet , and so do his disciples :
and elfin minstrels with assiduous care ,
and maddened in that vision -- are exprest
looking , stood quaking there
now first pompeius for himself alone
while he 's thinking thoughts whose tenour is no more
but it can never forget
to this sick couple there :
" so shall it be , " said kriemhild , " to meet thee i 'm prepar'd
with his devolte apparantie
who have hearts as tender and true , and spirits as loyal ?
then when it feels , in cloud -- girt wayfaring ,
inches in length , broad , and narrowing towards the points : from
the breast to long forgotten love ?
to the earth 's remotest border ,
the ocean is chain'd , all freedom restrain'd ,
a glowing alley to the circus door ;
may your wit be still sprightly , your heart be still light ,
for ever and ever unknown .
and others bade the halcyon sing her softest lullaby .
queens , their eyes blue like the ice ,
she breathes the balmy breeze ,
she confessed the contest o'er .
and after a moment 's pause
those waves , which , black with many a navy , bore
for the delay of the seene - pow’re divine
and eagle firemen knew
your lips ! your lips . " it shook me where i sat ,
the mocking - bird still sits and sings , o melancholy strain !
" all too long have ye betrayed her ;
for happy spirits to alight ,
tumbles and chimes , and the perfect hour
since then , my honour'd first of friends ,
i never can forget .
that each tail should be properly placed .
then hail to merry autumn days , when yellow corn - fields shine ,
" for an oligarchic parliament ,
unto hire hihe worthinesse ,
and to fire the penny cannon in the bow .
i 'll begin it,--ding , dong , bell .
and tyrants would tremble and go to the wall .
and the boldest held his breath
that swallows up all ruined light ?
but i want room -- so i believe i shall battle the rest out at
tearing at its wounds once more .
thirsting hillside .
for i am done with blessings scattered wide
more than my kiss . i might , in time , aspire
at once he fell ; and gasping out his life ,
that in books are found ,
little foot , whose lightest pat
that thou mayst not hear the cow - bells ,
the execrable birth - day odes.--_freneau 's note , ed . 1786 . _
sir olivier to his side hath gone ;
i know what i 'm about ,
and resolution in your eyes .
of darkest and greenest ivy clings ,
and pass not crownless to persephone .
i winna share your gowd wi ' ye ,
and fetter'd to her eye--
they 're different , though .
" who did it , dauber ?   what did captain say ?
to many a row of pipes the sound - board breaths .
thy beauty makes me like the child
again we 'll be assailed , / that would i now in sooth declare .
i met my lass ' midst braxfield bowers ,
william cullen bryant was fortunate in his father , who , if he was
as they unfold before thy will to know
as by a greater gladness urged and drawn
and he 'd miss me , the same as i do him .
from under the sheltering trees ,
the luckless teucrians hurled their unavailing rain .
their power to guard them and befriend ?
but this my bow , whose shafts smite down
the holy hermit raised his eyes ,
ah ! me , that memory stirs
nature 's immedicable ill ;
my watery eyes , my sighes and heauy cheere ,
and a wind blew out of the west where i sat ,
_ the vast and interesting epic literature of ireland remained
from every belfry in the town !
and collated with the original and early editions ,
transcendent genius ; thus to grapple truth
it did not move my grief to see
in their own darkness , thronged into the moon .
said he , " come up to that throw if you can , and i will throw
after a fixed plan and order fixed .
but though to write be now a task of ease ,
grief to you , shame or grief , here is the story--
' tis there the courtier
in converse sweet to wander far--
as cobby(4 ) as can be ;
and neat and nicesome
yet always ocean .   in the damp spring woods
therefore the multitude , who see their guide
ou - yang hsiu of lu - ling
" no luck ever ! well , i must die alone . "
" those who view mathematical science not merely as a vast body of
until the presence of the king she gained ,
there at the plough thou find'st thy team ,
befriend his true believers ;
but _ not_--ah ! not the same dear fishes--
names for the high and low ,
wooden supports and rafters ) and the arrangement is still common
the orchard , the meadow , the deep - tangled wild - wood ,
it thrilled through all your being -- meet his eye ,
and still it looks as when the hours
his passion , cruel grown , took on a hue
beneath the tree 's umbrageous limb
and the hurt and the ache of it
from out the wide destruction , which , entombing all ,
and my javelins i have broken ,
in the rising moon ;
in harpy heavens , and swoop and clang
by bharat ’s tidings gratified :
better i deem it , if my kinsmen strike ,
with gentle voice , i thought it thine ; it said ,
floods with light the dazzled heaven ;
till i shall make him doff his warlike gear ,
from that city nimbly they issued out .
and dark mayenne was in the midst , a truncheon in his hand :
any color -- so long as it 's red--
i of great herds of naked souls took heed .
' tis he who held carthage , alferne , garnaille ,
belly . but now i will speak out and my word shall surely be
thou knowest , who didst lift me with thy light !
not a rag was twisted round them ,
shiver now , ' tis nothing new .
with horror , and the fillets of the god
it is not that cheek--'tis the soul dawning clear
so was that name bore forth ,
the rising of the vales !
i saw as i looked in their faces
" say ye rejoice , though grieving ,
voting a part of them to pious uses .
you be careful what you say , and mindful what is said .
she , indeed , were worthy of thy friendship :
there i used to sleep under a shapely rock .
the polish'd leaves and berries red
the deathless gods gave me a fair wind , and brought me
and found he brings on shoulders borne
as when in northern seas at midnight dark
those whistle tempests and light airs obeyed ,
have been the prevalent characteristics of the inhabitants of
and that is why i keep a drum :
then a pile of heads be laid--
how , matched with mandricardo , strove that lord ,
myself distinguished god .
and every sad and lovely thing :
that grew beside their door ; and the remains
tangle of your roots that plunged underground ?
thy glorious youthful prime !
and there were fishes out in rows ,
of her birth upon the meadow ,
o sleeper , thou so early loved and blest !
a game at priests resolved to play .
yes -- ye may fill your garners , ye that reap
he upward climbs , till , beneath two trees ,
every tree is but a harp for your desire ,
motherwell tries to qualify the censure of his brother editor , by
to build a new life on a ruined life ,
to your faith , to your honor , this brother dear of mine ,
be a shepherd on the mountains ,
a necklace on my breast , and not the lord of serpents .
almost entirely to dramas , prose , fiction , essays , and criticism .
and love but her for ever ;
and fell like a plummet into the grass .
from the slopes of all the mountains ,
stage by the awnings of the theatre , of the works of art adorning
and hast devised for hellas heaviest woe . "
i am he whom thou seekest !
on taking other people 's lives ) .
love is most like a bird ,
that truth with truth may blend in after years ,
by all the universe adored ,
or how is ' t matter trembles to come near it ?
there to gossip with the strangers .
he heard the roar above him , heard the roar
she heard the dead man say--
he and i only hinder one another .
a deathless fame he did bequeath ,
i ca n't understand why you turn up your nose
and the second man will press him hard again .
an ' could behave hersel ' wi ' mense :
clasp each the other in a perfect whole .
but thy eternal summer shall not fade ,
he held some land , and dwelt thereon,--
and you 'd see them great gun - horses spring
again and again ,
as in the streets your wretched rhymes you marr'd .
on this are pope and cardinals intent ;
his last " god bless them ! " stopped at " bless"--
marshy and fenny places . ed . 1788 .
how the affair ended was never inquired , for fear of renewing his
and it comes most willing--
and bharat gazing , overcome
the sapless foliage of the ocean , know
once more on the broad - bosom'd ocean appearing , vol . iv . , 199 .
personages . we can also watch the process by which feigned
the highest of the trinal stairs , whereon
sudden at her feet a lover
but oh , the shy and eager thoughts
turned on their chief -- could doubt the shame ,
not the old familiar one,--
while the sands o ' life shall run .
" his conquered scholar hath this answer sent ; "
till he said , i 'm come hame to marry thee .
his armour for the peaceful gown ,
breed but rebellion , and displease ,
two lovers looking to be we d ;
thus what i seek is in you ;
faust ( _ with averted head _ )
to pull the thorn thy brow to braid ,
stretched over those dusky foreheads
for under the sun is no hope of release .
eer she , etc .
his arms are folded on his breast ,
feet , and that i have been thus upside down , than he will stay
the weeping fir , thick beech , and sailing pine ,
delight beyond all measure , / of joys an overflow ,
hide thy head among the grass - roots ,
forming an identification tag .
sta ' my ewie , horn , and a ' :
hung aloft on poles for scarecrows
in the centre of the caldron ,
and when the day is done ,
kullerwoinen 's song and echo ,
o goat - foot god of arcady !
when the elks were trampling o'er thee ,
sat convolutis artubus
might have sentenced our friendship to death long ago ?
rapt by the whirlblast to fierce scythian strands
across the hills , we take the upland way .
brothers , yet again i bring thee
ev'n juno , forc'd to cease their ancient hate .
and if , past noon , her toil began to irk ,
him to the war with horses and with cars
what a pity that the old man
toward the icy water ,
each display'd the customs of his own native land .
i 've sought thy father far and wide .
he had heard their conversation ;
that hangëd down by his knee ;
lest he should err , or stumble unawares
the goddess in his form thus them address'd .
prec . thou hast a stout heart and strong hands .
we can not hear them ; for horse and man
and he said : ' my son , osseo ,
called in his cast on th ' ides -- but he
curetes , and for all their numbers they could not hold their
dem inkybator chickens dat 's hatched by de clock ,
over the sparse green hair of the wheat ,
but it had completely vanished ;
very good cheese from lawson ,
he swam the eske river where ford there was none ;
" do not walk in thine own virtue ,
take their lives if needs must -- when it comes to the worst ,
  the extension of the divine love ultimately even to the
o life , thou hast no power left to strive ,
nor believed that a land of enchantment could show
of man can picture half of these !
filled with fire -- a mighty flaming death .   the fiends perceived
who doth ambition shun ,
and memory sleeps beneath the gray
with shatter'd vessels and disabled oars ;
so serried was the battle of the foe ! --
and thus ; while hermes on his pinions lay ,
they stopt and looked at thalaba ,
untasted , " vain , " he cried , " your fear of death .
but she was jist a child when jim
" oh , burning flames ! quick , swallow me ! "
as a sepulchral pillar stands , unmoved
breaks down its barriers in its rapid course ;
moxayaual , v , 2 . from _ yaualoa _ , to wander about .
were for bringing in the son .
there 's catfoot and mugwort , archangel and balm ,
thousand natives of ireland ; one thousand five hundred natives of
you   prate   about   my   learning .    i
call no more !
while i stood munching my first bread that month :
on stump and stack and stem , --
was thy command prolonged .   but silenced now
earth : mightiest were they , and when they fought the fiercest
within one league of my retreat ;
and their young fresh lust to camden town ,
where the nations that are saved , their sabbath shall begin .
and each figure had a meaning ,
for fame , for freedom , fight , fierce furious fray .
and then go home to bed . "
i tremble underneath the cruel whips ;
quiet eyes ;
his hands across the keys at last ,
thou comest ; thee the gods have guided to our land .
even to his flesh and blood -- strike with your lance ,
a pilgrimage from far to look once more
thinking of this , my voice chokes and i ask of heaven above ,
remember deirdre and her man ,
by laughing too , and lying down ,
not of earth only , but of highest heaven .
rocking the gloomy hollow .
was the archetype of the speech i knew .
there , with a rock 's huge fragment toils amain
when you were saying , " oh , look up at me ! "
thus have they taken dorothy the maid ,
i propose a health to those
leaped through tangled flags and rushes ,
town , princes , people , perished in a day .
alder and poplar , and the redolent branch
to meet and greet her on her way ;
no , ah kee , with his roguish tastes , is not to be trusted in the
peace pleads -- love your fellow - man ,
his roman temperament
harald sheared his field , blood up to shank :
as more than once in dire mischance was rued ,
_ mas faltamlhes pincel , faltamlhes cores ,
with mars his banner and minerva 's bayes .
will prattle merry , laughing gay !
the same long murmur'd melancholy tale .
and said : " go on , for i am strong and bold . "
aloft in the clouds , and they rule among all men and among
my mother shook me ,
that is my thought of you .
from thy dear eyes , when i my fate was trying ,
that every step of high emprise
bid that heart stay , and it will stay
and sítá ’s truth which naught could bend .
it shall not be sad , and it shall not be long--
and called herself tritonis .   lethe 's flood
bliss there is none , but unprecarious bliss :
rune xxvii . the unwelcome guest
unloosed their knotted hair ; and thus the pool
there is no other havoc left to do .
then rose triumphant where the white fires fumed ,
shook with the war - charge yesterday ,
then comes her dim touch , faintly warm ;
when , from the orchard row , he pours
that doth not in her sunshine share .
of teþe tenfully to - geder , to teche hy{m } be quoy{n}t . ”
i think that i could smile -- could calmly say ,
all returning to dust and grass ,
i charge thee by that lord whom we revere
and the warrior seized ; yet scathed she not
and black and murky is our sky--
“ in death , more calm from what i just explain'd . ”
and i do n't recommend you not
_ storm along my gallant captains ! _
and all the dames and damsels , that once swell'd helca 's state .
" ad finem - in de ende - i moost mendion do you all ,
and , e'en to the grave ,
than thy design of me -- therefore incline
those languid eyes so sweetly smiling ,
fast and far the hero travelled ,
look , will , the city gates with sentries set .
whom you meanly wound
clean through his breast the thrusting spear he drove ;
the sail whose fragments , shivering o'er
god ! of whom music
more small and smooth and round . that first transmits
o woman , now thy golden day 's at morn !
on a golden shambhu !
the old folks smite and jaw ,
then nine corporals are written
syllables , artificially varied in length when in metre , 401 - 404 ;
thou'rt free to do so ! gladly i 'll attend ;
reader or hearer of this distorted language found himself in a
to the kissed place .
and ay ' he catch'd the tither wretch ,
no , freely i would praise the man,--
to whom eumæus , thou didst thus reply .
i think that i know best .
alone i sit at eventide ;
thus might a jackal tend the deer .
_ the dropsical man thirsting now for christ . _
such this day 's doctrine -- in another fit
i 'll ay ca ' in by yon town ,
been bound . thereon , when they began rowing out to sea , ulysses
for rome too daring , and for greece too dark ,
' tis thus the bard is scorned by those
i have not thought of you , i believe ,
a thing of tenderness the next ,
and there 's the dawn , poured out like wine
of east wind and mist
the world forgetting , by the world forgot :
mirth and laughter ;
ennobled by the charity we spare .
makes us believe ourselves as good as any .
of seaport town , and with outlandish noise
and upward stretching , on the fire i look'd ,
already i shuddered to feel the wave ,
and the sun had been imprisoned
see hopes and friendships dead about him lie--
when thou in dust shall sleep .
all heads must come
a noise as of a sea in tempest torn
the glove , and thou the staff . " the two reply :
then down ye'll hurl , deil nor ye never rise !
and she [ ) i]n th[)e ] midnight wood will pray
though you build of stone a castle ,
and sang about it sorely ...
his ears cocked up as his blood ran higher ,
but on i glide , i go , and , fretful ,
the serene world - sight of the thinker . "
of love aloof , and bare not
oh , with what labor did her shoulders bear
for pleasure when their minds wax amorous ,
as well all lamas ' subjects may be ,
thus she finished it perforce and sore against her will .
to council , i arose , and thus began .
are vowed to greece and vengeance now .
again outspoke the rodenstein--
of its buoyant youth resumes ;
as puts to flight pale fear , and scruple cold ,
full three years he bore him as their leader ;
of the ninth chasm .   a rundlet , that hath lost
from the dark dingles , to the nightingales .
but ajax at his waist wounded the son
the mist - pink west with hazy threads .
more than the churchmen say . we are so teased
( throwing herself at his feet )
sacrator laid hydaspes on the plain ;
when reason 's rays deceptive shine ,
it is that distant years which did not take
when march brings back the adonis flower
gin ' thou e'er wauk'st alane to think
from sea to shiba fanned .
now have i found the peace that fled from me ;
with which it knits , as life in you is knit .
and absent kings be honour'd in their coin ;
only bear with me in patience ,
the pealing anthem swells the note of praise .
it was but the mountain - berry
permit a child to join ,
you 've a glittering key
forth snatch'd me from the pleasant cloister 's pale .
upon a showery night and still ,
the other cause : and if the other fall ,
i 'll leave thy heart a - dying .
& þ{us } of lenþe & of large þat lome þ{o}u make ,
new matter , to make good his great suspect .
the fairest of memories from far - away home ,
in liquid waves to cut their fomie waie ,
repulse by scylla . she endeavours , without success , to make him
seemed linked with me , but how i could not tell .
by every martyr 's tortured limb ,
without bringing the shakes
i unaided could not save thee ,
just hear me out . you 'll find you 're wrong .
bewar that of thin oghne bale
be she fairer than the day ,
my home to be , by my own orders , razed !
their thighs and stirrups quivering , like the spear .
i little took it as her last good - bye ;
and somewhat back retir'd : the same did all ,
anon a mason 's work amazed the sight ,
the sixt , and of creation last arose
when he handed it to mother .
ye have that for which we still endeavor .
or if invok'd at softer hours ,
now is he come unto the chamber door ,
dripping from some diviner star ;
the right wing 's sinewy strength away .
again appear transfigured on the screen ,
why , bless my soul , the man 's asleep !
remain'd a christian , and conform'd long time
from the gorge of aspra to dourestan ,
my fugitive years are all hasting away ,
and i saw -- how i envied him !
phoenicians ! true , that name is found within
the silver ring from out the popinjay 's beak--
may garner close through dust and gloom
behold ! a white - robed angel came
securely in the coping ,
with faith of all earth 's hope renew'd
he said : and on the silver hilt he stay'd
fossor et inuento , si fors dedit , utitur auro ;
shall you that haven find .
i never shall find it ,
great caire it hight , whose commons from each side
when they 're halted by a stick .
with boughs above them closing ,
and set him on the royal throne
chase of glory wears the spirit ,
_ as flowery vestures do descry
of burning streets , like moonlight on the water ,
god doth not work as man works , but makes all
who can not see her countenance for her soul ,
how the waves and tunes combine
on their faces ? for truly they yet live , and have a name
fain would i fade away , as i have lived ,
and never any from a queen .
using nature that 's an art to others ,
gave to love 's feast its choicest gust ,
from the gates they sallied forth ,
yea , her i long had learned to lack ,
last -- you do not know !
here is a juice , makes drunk without delay ;
to arms , ye brave , etc .
into the darkness , poets of a day ;
an ' voices too--
i heard her breathe my name .
and wattles ' swaying gold ,
o'er his glories flings vestments of shadows ,
its lights mistaken for the evening stars ,
we think no birds so happy as we !
and a soft , alluring light
asleep and digesting it all .
  the present gombaroon , a town on the persian side of the gulf .
what will these gathered princes say ,
fine shields they have , and spears valentinese ,
shakes his ambrosial curls , and gives the nod ,
by jest and quip and jollity
muttered in multitudinous monotone .
hope , who led us oft astray ?
on the low place where i am lain ,
when thy daily cares have ended ,
in thy woods ' prophetic heaving
nor hath ink written , nor in fantasy
love 's architecture is all one .
' myself will to my darling be
and i recognize the oarsman .
" ich bin ein frommes , gestorbnes kind . "
he look'd down -- the falcon -- and bethought him :
and at night kabibonokka
he seeth , and calleth them fair :
thy severed head among the servant throng
so much delights me , as those graceful acts ,
so in they hurried all , maz'd , curious and keen :
an other is of that i here ,
its most vehement partisan , but he is remembered only for
oh , lovely earth ! oh , blessed smiling sky !
undone , done with , soon done with , and yet dearly and
and shove away the worthy bidden guest .
the silver - breasted swallows from the nile
o gallowa ' braes they wave wi ' broom ,
which is not yet believed--
" who will guide our vanguard / through this hostile land ? "
our rose was but in blossom ,
and the lambs , because it has made a wolf of the shepherd . for
but left behind him heroes bright ,
then through my lips those suffering hundreds cry ,
the moon come pale , the wind come cool ,
you are sleeping and dreaming forgetful ,
that threatens now to lay me low :
that linger here -- the lizard and the cat ,
with mystery and silence
i 'll write to my love ,
in my hull a golden cargo ;
nor extreme heats nor winds of mighty powers--
his carbuncle ; mohamed in a ditch
sing mournfully , oh ! mournfully ,
with the haste and the waste of it all .
along a man with a dead woman -- and a pickax ,
' what is the matter , master ? ' said little john ,
the cricket chirps all day ,
and in the armies of sennacherib
laughing , whisper , " ' tis the spring . "
dreams , and no more -- still let me cling to thee !
of thy dear child on ruin ’s brink .
though a paradise each has been forced to resign ,
and strength of will can take the hand of doom ,
" fair would thy son 's name look upon the roll
with fury has pursued her wand'ring race .
what use , a whole compactly to present ?
so much as to conceit she dances--
to greater perfection ! an idea countenanced by modern
there shall ye see him as he said to you .
he had that stroke , " the manor - pat , "
whence tronto and verde in the sea disgorge .
but while on mortal lips i shape anew
between the loosening fibres of the heart .
whatever wind and fire may do : i prithee pray no more ,
if any man wronged them , that man he blinded ,
and sche was cleped madame eglentyne .
they watch the river 's gleam ,
blithe - hearted or sad , as the cloud or the sun subsided ,
but patient head and willing hand
was he an ungrateful one .   he was quick to learn ,
before , corebo was of bilbao hight ,
no sorrowful repentance here , but mirth ,
still , still it loves the lowland tongue .
quarrel , emulate , and stand
and silken line on glittering reel enroll'd ,
but most himself to mercia he addresses ,
to brace defensive armour tight :
vain are all your craft and cunning ,
i love my life , but not too well .
oh , the world will ask : " did he get the girl ? "
' twill give thee back thy form . "
that hence they had not one day 's journey wended ,
to be so far behind in praises meet--
tosses the foam . far off the sunset gleams :
see that tiny one , what boredom he expresses !
an elm at night ; an arrowy waterfall ;
the daisy , with its hood undone ,
and said , " twice did she call for thee last night . "
the ' vivida vis animi . ' the freshness of feeling and vividness of
there 's something tells you just as plain ,
with the retirement of sweeney , and cries of " hedrick !
yet ev'ry motion , ev'ry smile and word , dear ,
their great eyes shining bright like wine ;
the triumph , which plays ever round the point ,
how the woodchuck digs his cell ,
like an arrow from a cross - bow ,
as thy own laurel claims of me belov'd .
tremendous war against the gods i waged :
you shoot a fellow down
to circumspangle this my spacious sphere ,
her stars shine fair ; the silver river spans
woman high of fame and name ;
whate'er the grecian venus was .
hark to the murmur deep and low ,
or sunset 's yellow play
rising among the lonely irides ,
it is gret wonder that men caste
space to dispute what no one ever could
now starting into sight ,
the clock strikes two!--gage smote upon his breast ,
but ' e gets into the drinkin'-casks , and then o ' course we dies .
so would i have it ; let achilles slay me , if i may but first have
and charm our cares away .
beggar to beggar cried , being frenzy - struck ,
high as the heavens , wide as the earth ,
happy 's the home where these fair sisters vary ;
he always what i gave approv'd ;
finnigin writ it to flannigan ,
but , in his armour clad , to battle sent
i kissed your feet and let you go .
they enter my castle wall !
who would not oft be stung as this ,
already he feels envy of the dogs
śatrughna by his side remains .
the glitter of their rifles ,
the bleak rock - shouldered hill the soldiery
the rest was love 's . he took me by the hand ,
con ojos los miraban de extranjeros .
but clear your decks , and here's--"the sex ! "
so that no vengeance they may fear from them ,
amid what friendly greetings and caresses ,
toilers by the day , and hirelings ;
which from the earth bear up its helpless weight ;
artists ! margaret 's smile receive ,
i have kept of precious cure ;
" at my mistake i 'm really pained ,
where planets float like lonely gold - flowered nenuphars
this week is the third since you began . "
think not we are unkind ;
sounds of woe across the river .
absence is cause of straungnes ,
could i bring back the day whose sun has set -
tiny , murmurous , like drops of rain ,
_ bleezing _ , _ bleeze _ , blazing , flame .
soon his voice rang forth as chairman
milton describes the position of the planets in the sky as--
and there instruct the twain , whom fano boasts
our foaming bowls with gen'rous nectar crowned ,
and shouts , in stentor ’s sounding voice , aloud ;
throughout armagh the great , renowned
all drab an ' brown--
she seated on the black yew 's tortured root ,
an eaglet ;
consider eke , how that the harde stone
of brother in a foreign land ;
how royal george , the lord leuk o'er him !
the place where fairies used to be ;
_ freedom she craved , that others she might free ! _
such havoc made of his uncinctured friends
but save me from a pauper ’s tomb .
what you have done .
fond friends , do n’t grieve
i seal my love to - be , my folded art .
nor finds the lesson done ,
i hear the organ peal within ,
* the moonbeam away--
i consecrate to thee .
that all it scorned at once is fled ,
mit schwerem schluck und gluck .
to ask heart - felt benevolence . "
and with his arrowy radiance from mid heav'n
the stars come nightly to the sky ;
or went stone - cold , i 'd find another body .
intent to sum in dearly chosen phrase
from an eagle in the sun ;
when death is so near it hustles hence
gave but a few years ' grace ;
in any kind : thou wilt discover still
to sigh unheard in to the passing winds ?
far - off , a blot upon the stream , and said
all books he reads and all he reads assails
trusts that he is a hero 's valorous son . "
no flattery !   my honest muse ,
and those meddowes full be set
weightless on the breeze ,
few plays have ever been so beneficial to the writer , for it
my child , who reads this simple lay ,
return ; for now the light of heaven again
spiritual order were so wide and various , uses by turn all the
and a yell from the hill - top and roar of a gong ,
that once was in play
i 'm very lonely now , mary,--
and i should break earth 's order and commit
but ' tis thy true love willy ,
  the ancient oxus .
the neighboring boughs and limbs , and with deep roar
and in the voices of the song " hosanna ! "
may i , ere i depart , bid balder hail ,
silently talking to the silent travelling moon :
hurrah ! hurrah !
after his head he with a sigh had shaken ,
and hung them out to dry ;
sweet one ! my meaning do not misconceive !
led them on .
we can recall such visions , and create ,
he bids me keep me free ,
the woodbine leaves littered the yard ,
we must be fiddling and performing
and a whirligiggy ,
and at his temples aim'd the deadly spear ;
than tragic poets -- a good _ distress _ .
that what man to the lawe pleigneth ,
upon their fleet career looked down .
or _ daphnis 's _ despair , which _ thyrsis _ sings in the first
for whiche hem thoughte felen dethes wounde ;
when ordered by their sire the king ,
narratio , divisio , confirmatio , confutatio , conclusio .
bearing clear proof of usage and of years ,
and nat withstandynge that christ our sauyour
the river stay'd the mules and steeds to drink ,
das ist die letzte wohl ? nein , eine noch :
" oh , if you ask me that , what will he do ?
e'en to the doting mother :   but thine own
we 've drunk to our mothers ' land ;
to war , from which strong men shrink shuddering back . "
to her gave answer hildebrand , / a thane right praiseworthy :
and sweet it was to dream of father - land ,
exiled far from scenes of pleasure ,
dame ingeborg sank to a peaceful repose .
and round the rebel giants of the night
therefore is he that firmã¡n - issuing shah
down there where you are laid ?
like man , unquiet even when dead !
over every gleaming tress .
full well they laugh'd , with counterfeited glee ,
friend as follows :
that which i ask'd the woman in my dream .
did our spirits quail at a new four - rail ,
with the sweet sisters , holy faith and love ,
only by links of love : when thou art gone ,
upon the same subject with the preceding
now on the elm the misty buds are swelling ,
such , panthus ' warlike son euphorbus seem'd ,
the night shakes them round me in legions ,
come from the silence so long and so deep;--
long toil'd the hero , on the verdant field ,
of the forbidden fruit to taste a peece ,
fro the londe it blewe that lady bryght
in sunday suit he rigs himself for town ,
the shutters are shut , no light may pass
_ rich ( men ) roused from their rest , ran to their weeds , _
of all the five , on bayonets met his lot ;
which , as i deem , is for you all prepar'd ,
upon hire lendes ( loins ) full of many a gore .
that the stranger may sit and speak with me and hear my
thys i{e}r{usa}l{e}m lombe hade neu{er } pechche
wit can no reson understonde ,
may keep my name a little while,--
theyr enuy wastyth theyr owne herte and theyr mawe
at the fall of the year there is autumn in my heart .
much must be reconciled , much justified ,
place called home .
startles the desert over africa !
the bride at the altar ;
" bohl " quoth the german , " an't i ' pon de wheel ?
but tiny yelled till the cock marched off ,
and my own trusted friends , not yet , forsooth , let us unyoke , but
the shadow of a dream ,
oh ! help them , father , to endure its weight .
extend to heaven the bounds of despair , we ask
as from holy land i came .
man still must err , while he doth strive .
thus the youthful hiawatha
what were his secrets , agony ? he seemed
but whether she shall ever love me true
and a strong bird 's beak and brow ,
the parents being dead and gone ,
you snarled tut - tut for welcome to tum - tum ,
my heart is awed within me when i think
" what deed of fame , for woman 's heart to trust a horse 's might ?
to kepe a regne out of meschief .
for ever from the ways of grace ,
jollife and gaye , full of gladnesse ,
_ now _ when she sees in the village
i gave you one in the first canto;--
like a poet hidden
would be sure to take cold in tears .
i cannae joy at feast ,
the dinner - things removed ,
o , knowing not , who cares ?   it may be well
did to the ocean himself commit ,
close by the bee - house richard dean ,
the pleasures read in sparks of substance burnt ;
no matter ; in the future , when i celebrate the beauty
that touch us with warm misty fingers
the deed was done !
when the wind blows the cradle will rock ,
down from the hills in snowy rills ,
i will sit in the little chair and wait ,
bring , as ye , a rest for me ?
either with nimble wings to cut the skies ,
peace in the crowded town ,
sweet was the smell of the dewy leaves and the flowers in the
he knew , as soon as he had marked the lore .
and in four countenances i descry'd
the depths of being only prizes .
fringed with gold , unwearied , nimble , swift ;
the tale of bacchus and the vine is told .
just when they have learned to help us ,
that hath held fast
how long in that same fit i lay ,
a lonely spark with silvery rays
their ancient sovereign next his people charged .
as a dew - drop ,
i wake , i seek amid the throng
texitur , exitium examen rapit :
the lamp of knowledge , then may one see well
brybours and baylyes that lyue upon towlynge
and when the regions , wrapped in light
to him assenting , priam , ancient king ,
the eternal dawn , beyond a doubt ,
" hunger is hard .   but since the terms be such -
satiate with genial moisture , when god said
of the lovely laughing water ,
prove title to your heirship vast
solution of the maze .   what i have heard ,
" death , that must come , comes nobly when we give
they wak’d each other . "
whom solon wisely counselled to attend
the clock at noon , and let the hour remain
and with complacency so absolute
  “ þ{o}u may not enter w{i}t{h}-i{n}ne hys tor ,
before the altar in the midst of it
the pedlar 's bill , and sermons by request .
what clung in his arms ?
it may be that your eyes deceive you slightly ;
and not blush so to be admired .
on mount or plain ;
revise , copy , punctuate , and then print it sometime ,
and whatsoever feeble is and whatsoever fears ,
hath promis'd ; and , of all the greeks , hath sent
i can not stay nor be your wife again .
surely hate were better than this !
beyond archangels ' unassisted ken ;
you remember -- don't you , brother--
ere he to join the dance had heart ,
his main - mast totters -- down it falls--
walks , pools , and arbours , homestead , hall--
“ the sails with clustering berries loaded hang .
he hath cleared mine inward sight ;
he spent in tranquil happiness .
hoist up your sails of silk ,
" and you shudder when his chain clinks ! " she rejoined .   " o yes , i
' sail on ! sail on ! sail on ! and on ! ' "
from _ post _ to _ courier _ , formed the motley mass ;
farewell , farewell , the falsest youth
lviii . " fie ! turnus , fie ! wilt thou behold unstirred
when , and whereof created , for what cause ,
the bitterness be past .
and often he thinks of the chaplain 's word
his life will empty be -- and so are you !
sprang from his chariot . as two vultures clash
lousers of loue , and infecters of charite .
almonio yielding , yet as ill content :
and wilt thou leave me thus ,
that i could not venture to awake her .
ther ben lovers : forthi if thow
achieve a noble breed to rule the house .
let them hear what the birds tell them now :
come back , come back to mind ...
returned to - day from holloway ,
in the waves a rock was standing ,
" the bright ones of heaven have trodden me down as they passed ;
of your rich muscats and your sherries fine ,
behold how goodly my faire love does ly ,
we caught a cod the other day ;
and he worked hard , scarce taking time for rest .
as one sees on some ancient urn , upthrown
as thin as a herring -- as fat as a pig ;
he watches , counting and recounting them ,
for i thought i should never hit on a chance
examining , had thus conducted me ,
only when thou art alone . '
speech makes manifest that thou art native of that noble
treasure .   the foul fiend gave him grim requital , deep in hell .
unless he spreads abroad its light
columbia , hail ! immortal be thy reign :
by lifting up the island and huge waves
young and so slender -- in shanghai ?
him , your own king , whom you from slavery
that sche nis ladi of his herte ;
then sees it not , for boughs that intervene
in all this matter -- so ye care to learn--
when next i went that way .
lateq ; prospectum jacit ,
our orders . " all unmoved and calm ,
how spectral and huge o'er the alkali waste ;
for their dear sons their sad tears flow .
but neither of these creatures would i be .
to rival thee he holds the western way ,
while all the cyclic heavens about me spun .
there rank and distinction perhaps you may find
my spirit rising , follows thee ,
their hearts are dust before the wind ,
“ o , sir , i ’ve come across the wold
is enough for my sinning !
with wonder and with joy intense
i think it cruel in them to do that--
you criticise the soul ? it reared this tree--
lave the sleek limb , or fill the vase
lash'd from the surges ) , through the vaporous night
he should no longer wish to shine
the _ razor - bill _ carved for the famishing group ,
she introduces me to men ,
" not that,--i can not part with that"--and died .
in the whole dern rigiment , white er black ,
it must have been extremely droll
" whether ' twas only ' hell and jemmy , '
blinkin , smirking , leering .
of sunny days and cloudless skies ,
but he became a courtier .   when the margrave
bleeding , it invariably stretches out its arm at the doctor 's
the best musicians skilled to play ,
let him fly to the fields ;      to the fight then he stepped ;
the last it stands near broad huron 's beach ,
to complain less , to accomplish more ,
nevermore in all thy lifetime ,
the hopeless , daily ills of teaching brought
poor broken flower ! what art can now recover thee ?
wind , have you never loved a rose ?
" ' t is like an egg , " another cried ,
of the fancy you 're up to , is _ fibbing _ , my lad .
play again , and play unceasing ,
just as rhetoric is justly carried over into poetic when in the
to him that sits theron
too long , too long ; and yet one little word
by me , o'er thee , as justments to the dead ,
and burst the curb , and bounded ,
let 's try it once more for the last time ,
" in such blessed weather we can go barefoot,"--said mother ,
shells from the frenchmen 's mortars round them broke .
from me , heaven 's queen , paris , to thee , king - born ,
it may be . god in heaven knows best .
and breaking waves in a rhythmic dance ensue ;
and both were still at last .
i drank as long as i could see ,
hadst thou nursed a block of birch - wood ,
with the beating winter spray ,
totters around among her flowers--
when now rogero and the stranger knight ,
naught in my life save a dream have i ,
and friendly for my sake they fear ,
every child may joy to hear .
for _ we _ have no great store of cloaks to boast ,
and happy could i die ,
and count of gain ,
only awake when slim twilight
my choice would be vanilla - ice .
where the waters gently pass ,
then turn’d to thracia from the field of fight
let me see all the fun ! "
through the woof
as thou shouldst do , the argument is refuted
then forth his words of anger burst
my witch indeed is not so sweet a creature
huddling : fast follow at their heels the hounds
her household motions light and free ,
th ' octogenarian chief , byzantium 's conquering foe.[lo ]
but pie , an ' ist the hot mincemeat
about him and kissed him , saying , " i am he , father , about whom
for feeling nerves and living breath--
by treacherous hounds again , i should have known
is left a profitless stain upon the leaves ;
you faster , if i can be convinced that it will in any
i feel thee in mine arms , a reed , that 's waving to and fro .
pages crowned the mixing bowls with drink , and served out
an eye which likes me not , but quick with pride ,
stretched , herdsman - like , as if to bask
( 2 ) the _ quintilla _ is a 5 - line strophe , usually of
where woodbines wild , with sweets perfum'd the air ,
and saw her , where aloof she sat , her brow
with god 's people take your place ,
fill up your glass , i beg ,
" bring the charge , prove the charge , brother ! speak it aloud :
to help you -- there are but my two sons ' lives
dream or name its phases ,
no less when they have done their work , and safe in italy
and wept o'er the beautiful daisy in bloom !
so little such oaths mean .
by strangers clad in some surprising grace .
but i forgot , when by thy side ,
for he stops the mad steed in a couple of " shakes " ;
if i 'd looked up one day , and seen your eyes ,
and trod the well worn - path , with throbbing heart ,
" lady , " he said , " the best . the hour is now .
astir . the air our very breathing fanned
and ' e stood by a rapid - firer gun ,
shows the dim moonlight through his scaly form ,
to thy husband 's home and kindred ,
struck from the shock of clashing human hearts .
" omne vafer vitium ridenti tangit amico ; " { 50 }
there is a cup which wisdom loud acclaims ,
mai to no point of mercy plie ,
for nature made her what she is ,
" there are many wicked people ,
your pedestal should help us much .
expelled , a picture from the mirrors ' plane .
the robin pipes when the sun is here ,
when i upon my margin had such post
p. a knave 's a knave , to me in every state :
an ' that ol' man jest wrapt up in him !
worse in mind , and who was evil - born . " i know not if more he
does thy song lull the air ?
that hath given thee my heart
and all the sounds were low and sweet ;
sleep in your quiet room , while through the
the best and fairest of the world endures
my love , forgive the anxious sigh--
said little dan o'shea ,
" -- 's war einer , dem 's zu herzen gieng . "
that brings us either ale or beer ;
scar'd by the brazen helm and horse - hair plume ,
freedom and joy on the sea flourish best ;
save in the form of youth enlarged from age .
in the east , above the crest
me therefore , question of what else thou wilt
troy ’s sacred walls , nor need a foreign hand ?
margin is sometimes noted ; but i have found nothing remarkable .
concurrent thrilled with action , and away ,
plenty for the hosts assembled ,
but , when your love was scarce a six months old ,
three to a mast they ran ; it was a race .
the governor 's mind , and how the governor
your tongue 's already thick with fur !
now it 's his whisker ,
tapering tips in the silence seen .
work of the world ,
_ they comb , and then they order every hair ;
wilt thou weep when i have perished ,
you guessed , from the way the sentence toiled ;
permitte libari manu .
and seth the mete and noght the net ,
i ' m happy in your arms ;
from some great task far - reaching and benign .
that had dropped into the water ,
above my shadow on the grass .   and now
ne’er to return again .
" i 'll give her mine , " whispered rose .
and all thessalia 's host our scanty band o'erbear .
where the panther and the leopard ,
' he told me his dreams . . . '
under a vertical sun , the exposed brain
is his most perfect shadow . "
so , if some mighty wrong with black despair
the voice of columba was heard from afar ,
cherish the cheek but make none blush at all .
robin redbreast lost his heart :
marjatta the hapless maiden
no voice unkind our faults to chide ,
the sport of winds : all these upwhirld aloft
a meal of _ pickled cabbage _ and ox cheek .
grew slack in battle . he , swiftly banished
little indeed could we save ; i sat the sorrowful night through
a cottage makes a country swad rejoice :
i dream of those two little feet
that she concludes , so was her courage lost ,
went down therefore to the court attended by her maidens , and
his queen -- his crown -- his all ,
then lay before him all thou hast . allow
it trembled off the keys,--a parting kiss
while i claim the god of glee .
the giant sunflower in barbaric pride
the father raised his voice above ,
fluctibus et fremitu adsurgens , benace , marino ?
while i 've a hand to save ,
echoes unceasing of voice and feet .
a noble vassal as none gainsay .
o let not those of whom the muse is scorn'd ,
arjuna , bhíma , and the twin - born pair ,
all day the birches bend to hear
when spring trips north again this year ,
" dead ! good luck to her ! " the man 's teeth chattered ,
by thunders of the white cascade ,
tumult .   the quakers are driven out with violence , edith
" it is a remarkable book and it grips . "--_daily telegraph . _
pours out to me her plaintive lay .
leigh hunt says : " assuredly , had he lived , he would have been the
and to their prayers i thus replied :
outshine the beauty of the sea ,
why should you be forlorn ? death only husks the corn .
why be you half disarmed ?   why to the field
ah , no -- i was mistaken :   every brow
helen except , loveliest of all their sex .
as through the gloomy woods we went
that , when my spirit won above ,
come , good old minstrel , follow me ;
that throbs in suffering .   you hold me tight ,
the torrents that from cliff to valley leap ,
" room there!--ho ! ho!--who bars the mountain - way !
since you have viewed the queen of my desire ,
he is the blondin of the dinner - table .
life and death he drew as circles ,
and sees the treasures of hell 's awful king ;
it here behoves me , from the path i pressed ,
that he laughs last who laughs the longest .
and my love annie 's wondrous bonny ;
the octoped with elephantine feet :
you 'll not believe it , though !
to think on her vows , an ' to think upon me .
and call for your severest strictures ,
and thence to rocca forte 's tower transport .
right well i view and deem thee one
( with the rapid pleiads , even ,
i can not tell ; the fields are all a blur .
and keep my baby from slumber .
and weapons and a skin of wine ,
“ the prince to whom thy fancies cling
or the little god of love turn the spit , spit , spit ? "
from depths of evening 's treasury dim
sees the morning sun arising ,
seared at the dazzling helm and nodding crest .
mar the music of your feasts in vain !
promisd to abraham and his seed : the rest
a lion of another kind .
almost upon the western wave
one sharp black shadow -- and the short , smooth horns
to the weaver 's , & c.
have ye not known , ye fools , that have made the present a prison ,
you then might sow to reap in vain .
while thick the gosamour waves wanton in the rays .
to such high grace unworthy to pretend .
ruin it is ! three causes for the moan
they were not so many as the achaeans . "
and god sighed in the sunset , and the sea
though piracy be their trade ,
harold ( sarcastically . )
when school begins each year , divide it up ,
him face to face ; for the gods use not to be strange one to
and helm to helm , and shield to shield they crushed .
but as he planned , and as he worked ,
my canto i defer to other time .
beneath the old gray arch , or bring home cowslips
and climb the crystal wall of the skies ,
since i can hope so seldom to seek them by the rhine . "
i answ'ring , thus ; " thy gentle words and kind ,
and oh , it may befall
where the gifts hang on the tree ,
make his paths straight
an ' thy breath is sweet as t ' breezes ,
warnings over folly 's gulf .
dear creator , omnipresent ,
be not more hard than others .   in the world ,
o all the willow trees , the willow trees
the mystery of death to explain ,
eve , easily may faith admit , that all
but fears them living , and fears more to die ;
but for your winsome lady :
perceiv'd , that moving shed ambrosial smell ;
or what here thou seekest / at worms upon the rhine . "
the bible from the grasp of hell !
the wind outshrieks from points and peaks :
with a spirit - laden weight did he lean down passionate :
latter being the most beautiful creature ever seen ) , had sent to
he slew them all with the trenchant glaive ,
thurgh his decerte love and grace ,
ful wel biloved and famulier was he
had striv'n in vain to reach but to his hair .
with pleading eyes , with sore and weary feet .
heart 's lightness from the merriment of may?--
whereof the oracle and sign
entered in a house directly ,
and high above the christian tents they view
and music shall untune the sky !
rafter of satin , and roof of stone .
ad taedas thetidis probante phoebo
into a dark and lonely wood .
  virgil , born at mantua.--_ed . _
to warn good seed to greet the fair earth 's face . '
man then is useful to his kind ,
nothing is our own : we hold our pleasures
but another version -- the danish -- whilst making froda and ingeld
he was nevoeu to themperour
then in the dust
the shepherd of the people , to make your sons cease from
flowers , among whose leaves sat the child elves , and learned from
which o'er the board is smoothly spread
whilst to the roll of drums
fair lady of learning , playfellow of spring ,
great stones in the palace , and stones in the street ,
charitable , chast , constant and innocent
so i piped with merry cheer .
quamlibet immenso diues uigil incubet auro ,
that being arisen , in the equal sun ,
to tib , my t'other wench ,
life 's journey past , for death prepare ,
began to burn and burn , and her lynx eye
and ill they kept , hath of the beauteous world
the grass mourns in the sunbeam ,
into the purer atmosphere of beauty ;
from every land has come a prize ;
enjoyed by the farmer , ' midst fair country scenes ;
so cobby went where nobby led .
thou wert still my favourite seat ;
to thee this ring ,
next , food to cook and soften in the flame
better if i had done so , but i was thinking about the horses ,
for oh , the sons we get
and day is brighter day .
whenever he gets near the front .
of this so universal dame ;
for being old - fashioned by several years ;
tu lectum consterne rosis , tu serta parato
drive away thy barking children ,
just a boy , a laughing boy ,
and hertes colde , hem wolde i that he twiste
met in caucus and selected
per gentes italas hominum quae clara clueret ;
truly to him who with me subtilizes ,
from the gay painted scene compelled to part ,
till my ten - strikes created a panic
but in the fair , white linen
her persuasive lures and spells ;
" most sorely they 'll grieve that their daddy is gone ;
visions by day and feasts by night !
from trifling things , we greater ills pursue ,
chin - deep in the swamp while sinking ,
gleaming beauty and of bitter sorrow . there is always before us a
ilmarinen , smith , is with me ,
when she came to the castle gate ,
smoothes out so soon the tangled knots of pain .
the little brown house , like a ground - bird 's nest ?
and the gospel dispensed
up to this point , as it should opened be ,
so much that others fly from without seeing ,
and tiny shadows sway across the floor ,
with thy sweet cries -- and , on bright eves , look up
and bloom of climbing plants shall show
and , with a sick surprise ,
and now go in and entertain your angels ,
the petals that the lantern strews upon it,--
the doctor has been catechised , ' tis plain ;
therein be neither stones nor sticks ,
love and the hour will put the world in tune .
and to the saint their reverence paid ,
old sir ! thou art no novice in these toils
uncertain , heartless , unresisting , fly :
his heart!--where 's the leg of the poor little maid !
de mille moucherons ! "
divides the crooked rock - held fig ,
his cheeks turn'd purple , and his nose turn'd blue ;
and palamon , that hath such love to me ,
an elm of massy trunk he seized and branch
them , and therefore is safe if they are so .   who knows , says
_ lunt _ , a column of smoke , to smoke , to walk quickly .
the cruelties inflicted , move his soul
" tick - tock , " it keeps saying the whole day long ,
and daniel didst thou save from cruel pain
while i nodded , nearly napping , suddenly there came a tapping ,
they had been left to haunt the gloom !
hark to the three .   chimed they in one ,
come and behold him in this piteous case ,
is a stranger . first find the queen .   her name is arete , and she
a music - hall aglow ;
who pinned his faith on ruskin ! "
when the clouds around thee gather ,
the trembling hosts of treason fled
the mingled raptures thrill ,
atmosphere .
save thy lowly sisterhood ,
how softly on their bowers
we saw great crimson figures crash ,
fly through the air by their volition borne ,
when will the day , the happy day , arrive ,
around him , and john doughty without cease
“ o ráma , make thy wishes known ,
she calleth first on chastitie
so that the low trees shuddered where they stood ,
have they not brought it ? what delays my book ?
the freshness of the early world .
to be made use of in acquest of gold ;
yet -- tho ' his face was white
yet does that burst of woe congeal my frame ,
walk side by side with love ?
exclusively to gentle womankind ,
the lips i would have cooled , alas !
in between the stars , but soon
i _ might _ have told ireland i pitied her lot ,
summons to rest the weary soul of time .
folded us round from the dark and the light ;
and lured the roving gale ;
a big fat yaller one , jes lak de yudder one .
exactly what we wanted .
his segretaire - " read
and they sped homeward to their world of light .
of a star the spirit - woman
a mechanic 's wife to be ,
hoping , by dint of these my scanty jobs ,
so does thy realm , my god , around me rise .
o i would i had a lover !
with the silver moon . "
in death - like slumbers , ' till the rising morn ,
to free the orphan from that wolf - like man ,
turned critics next and proved plain fools at last
again ! parshandatha , why do you harp
to waft her on . so , borne upon her bow
was not more sure than they .
amang the bonnie bloomin ' heather ,
on the borders of wainola ,
as i came up and saw from far
and their long stems tamálas rear .
that canopies the world around ;
“ the arid bones : a belly 's place supply'd
that his son was coming , and with him kriemhild fair ,
the dagger hid , i kissed her hair
there sat one day in a tavern ,
the garden walks are pleasant at this hour ;
within ' tis hollow .
then steal unnoted from the flurried eyes :
o freshness , living freshness of a day
mountains for his audacious crimes , condemned many times to an
yet at the narrowest point even the wisest man stops .
an ' it 's strange that ten sons can not keep one old man . '
"    g. putnam , d.d . , roxbury .
it will add to our enchantment ,
that the queen at her ease , and her maids , if they please .
and if the friendship scarce in each the same ,
let rustum lay about him as he will ,
as of ducks that die ill tempests .
from the great mount that clangs my ordained advance ,
for a brother that is my son . "
and the holy place
thickets even to the ridge of the hill . their hair was wrought in
let the english rake the bay ,
they rode till they came unto the sea - side ,
we may without violent effort believe that chaucer speaks in his
before the rathe song - sparrow sings
toward the middle , at whose point unites
purgatorial tortures of this infernal confine for the space of
gude ale keeps the heart aboon !
dawn .
and following the solitary path
humble seeker -- and not like him -- a cuss"--
she weeps with anguish in the gloomy night .
i dashed across unseen ,
who the place of your slave would supply very well . o
and , ere the first day 's circling sun is spent ,
the lark now leaves
but do n't be oneasy , my pippin ,
through the far - resounding forest ,
where , from high whitby 's cloistered pile ,
oud betty ’s advice .
in her proud tyrants ' bosoms , nor is now :
and flicker on the green ;
was rather fresh , too fresh indeed ,
the sun allows a scantier light ;
my horse reeled wildly to and fro
by love - abiding hands .
list to a ditty queer--
and distant warblings lessen on my ear
meantime , and will not long spare even me .
from your imaginative brain ?
with that soft moonlit radiance of light
that our great bard--
i , while zeus and the other gods bound me fast in pain ,
beneath an ample oak ’s expanded shade .
why go the west road now ?
canst thou forge for me the sampo ,
the callants a ' fear john tod ;
and this dream , hadst thou courage to hear
for they themselves have made the clyde ,
o sleep ! sweet sleep ! in vain , in vain
to fall at the feet of our lord .
their very shadows make us yield ;
wus dat a muskit shot me ?
hear the story of osseo ,
whilst ben he was brought to .
and sappho 's love is breathing still :
' tis warm , and , o , so still with thee !
but others tell of stranger things
which takth non hiede of vein honour . "
the songs my heart hears echoing ;
what stranger sought the lonely isle ,
and lighted on my hand .
but i my father ’s word will keep .
donec uirenti canities abest
twirly , tweely ,
the species of all things to me resort
the sun in his blue realm above
now , i well may shudder and sicken;--
no more let beings of superior birth
and feel content to know but part
the cough , the ptisick , i consume
which blooming lilies glorified .
which ruthless turnus , when the youth he slew ,
that begging is only a muscular motion .
blown by each idle breeze ,
his own conviction ? ardent as he is--
answered , " then it is indeed an august and honoured goddess who
i seie noght sche is haveles ,
and aims his claws , and shoots upon his wings :
laugh o'er thy perjury ;
listen , though i do not fear you ,
like a swarm of carrion flies .
then king olaf cried aloud :
a watch will tell the time of day ,
the printed meaning of the lines ,
by dreams in the deep silence of the dark ,
that rowland " must be mad , "
vengeful malice unrepenting ,
with kitchen wit , allusive to his bulk ,
the sweetest song of childhood land .
now there ai n't no chorus ' ere to give ,
his glory still shines in their eyes ;
upon his ample shoulders
those cherries fairly do enclose
" the ball would reach his brain at once ! "
within the window , asked him to admire
from things which never dare call out
i of the good frontino speak , for whom
my wife an ' fam'ly !   do n't it sound all right !
and now comes a part o ' this thing ' at'll more'n like tax you to
stumbling and panting , on he ran , and on .
what tears of parents for their offspring slain ,
were toothed like saws , were venomous , and sharp ,
the commons rise against the law ,
as spotless as those shining sails to fly with !
had xerophthalmia not come on .
that brave the frosts and the fires . "
i was sprung , from lineage noble , with a spirit inly burning
leap , laugh , play .
seldom is the cock at rest ;
and the sands run low ,
exhausted , spiritless , afflicted , fallen .
to grace the mansion of our earthly gods :
canst thou not say ' thy home shall be my home , '
fulfillment dropping on a come - true dream ;
and from her cloudier tresses
lines , as in leon 's verses :
" but i am the coffee boiler ,
their flags to follow , and their arms prepare ;
then reason is it , nor dissuade thou me ,
groupe of nymphs and swains , under the appellation of modern
is my little lad , my elihu ,
with light united , day they give ,
neve inde navis inchoandae exordium
he had , she smiled .   ' anna , ' said jimmy sadly ,
when loud we heard the evening gun
will rise in majesty to meet thine own .
purior electro campum petit amnis(376 ) .
más de lo que el cuento pide ;
and i your love were death ,
tweedle , tweedle , twino .
all that is good in them belongs
and leave him naked , blind and mute ,
who when he sent the forth whither himself
when kings the punishment decree .
and his head was very handsome ,
all would share our fruits anon ;
and exile came it here .   lo ! further on ,
of her most holy life , that you may know
and in the trees of heaven rest .
now in these murky settlings are we sad . "
of neleus ' aged son ; with double zeal ,
accursed in his woe , bewailed his endless torment .   his words
" oh , i do n't know that , " the hardy bachelor said . " what about the
and both are full of pride :
who 'll sing a lullaby ,
each cupid stood with lighted match--
" for death and judgement are at hand ! "
uncertainty . besides , some envious , malicious devil , has raised a
yet grieve not we but sprawl and feast .
liberty to life without it . " this liberty is the type of that
when john express'd his ardent wish again
the way thou cam'st go through the dust again ;
deep in some dark and sombre chest i lie .
when the wind is up , its fair leaves open ,
at hand -- these are my company . "
having seven trumpets ; and an angel came ,
the woman - courage tested overmuch .
our way , and challenged?"--then , with some disdain ,
so long as they be somewhere in this world
than your grim tragedies of spain ! "
thy beacon flashes;--hail , beloved light
two chiefs , patroclus and automedon ,
navies for wealth shall roam the watery waste ;
and preide , sithen it was so
all these songs of nature , rhythmical , passionate ,
thy woes , dear son , my thoughts engage .
clasped like a garland all the outer rim ,
our intellect ingulphs itself so far ,
his arms went round her fast , she yielded meek ;
in case that worth should wanted be ,
there 's a gladness i ' t ' sky at bends ower thee ,
a thousand hawks that have moulted free ,
yet , since to france i sailed away ,
i care not though the cities fall
" golden moon , whom god has stationed
and heart of gold , hear my appeal :
then arose a second trouble ;
prone in the dust he fell , and clutch'd the ground .
must keep her dignity !
this is usually held to mean that ithaca is an island fit for
should also be made of the following poets who deserve
catch thee in his net of flax - thread ,
within a thicket on the mount they halt .
spoke as you thought , and , as you can not help ,
one rainy morning she heard guns and knew
and shakespeare 's word with goethe 's beats the sky ,
and so he did in truth ;
use ' ter call ' i m jes ' , " ashcake , " so .
bedecked with golden sheen--
first let us pray together .
and forgot his own griefs to be happy with you .
the carillon , which then did strike
a whisper reaches itching ears ,
on the blue back of the waters ,
he fathers - forth whose beauty is past change :
ha'pennyness ,
when the morning comes too soon ,
the cymrian , following , scarcely touch'd the shore
an earnest they are humbly praying !
within a cable 's length their vessels lay
goes down with a great shout upon the hills ,
a condition no dog could longer live in !
the hillsides must not know it ,
i 'm talking wild again ;
at length i land upon the strophades ,
that bound the roman fleet , the larger craft
and count me all the legions there .
nor uglier follow the night - hag , when call'd
for you the laurel smirched , for you the gold , too ,
and argive helen own her ancient lord .
" mary , " i said , " there 's a better thing
if you 're not mere carven stone--
than nature 's need in the hive ;
and the good little dame appears quite in a pet .
the rite of offering , as if they slew
gruffly then the panther answered :
thither , o hector , thither urge thy steeds ,
" and ( to avow the truth ) in jealous mood
for nature shall be my anchorage ,
but still , that thou mayst feel a greater shame
that has been bruised by war , and torn apart--
when lo ! a merry company
i deem well why life unshared
around you like a benison ?
when jonquils blow i think of one
or ripples like those that break at my feet .
is round me there ;
and bring them to a " sense of their condition"--
to praise the clear unmatched red and white
come , brethren , hand in hand ,
mother , let me fly away .
and broken chariot wheels , so thick bestrown
and tapers were lighted ,
und den fluß hinauf , hinunter ziehn die schatten tapfrer
to set in thy cap .
and warriors and serving men
fear not ; the leaves will strew
still with blind hands and robes blood - wet
that hastings ' firmness has preserv'd the state .
philological analysis of the proper names in the tale .   these may
amid the sun 's bright circle where thou sitst ,
will be betrayal of your trust,--
for all my beauty is dead ,
die herden nieder von den sommerhöh'n .
nor can be torn asunder without death .
denouncing evil with a zealous heart ;
heard the sacred cuckoo singing ,
and , peaceful , finished all her prayer and slept ;
some store the quiver , some steel - spring the bow ;
stimstam , formididdle , all - a - board la rake ;
homeward then he sailed exulting ,
" ulysses late he saw , on cretan ground
there was a damned successful poet ,
on his spear 's hilt from saddle throws him dead ;
on the gold meads of candahar ;
dark glancing , dark glancing , the daughter of spain ,
save then perchance , when thou beholdest forth
and then they rang the bell ,
threw her arms , in misery , round her brother —
markahattu , he the cowherd ,
in all my life before . this is my doctor .
to be extinguished -- never , dearest , never !
“ they fly ; to check their flight thy labor asks .
the country sounds again
_ who puts himself in another s power . _
a summons stern and clear :
sudden death will clutch the vitals of the victims of his ire !
love , that midst grief began ,
thereof , lest they appear as things that seem .
from north to south the flaming fluid ran ;
  appeared originally in the ' delights ' of 1646 ( pp . 123 - 4 ) , along
ominous , and red as blood ,
that pricks the waves to thrills .
and straitly nipt the hand , and flung it from her ;
cried , " it was on your prowess i relied for the saving of our
perceives the fun of stolen run ,
ah ! what height of worship in this world he wan !
and mantle o'er her neck of snow :
and arrow and hand and eye were one ;
to that within my breast ?
a creature of moods -- no tiresome saint--
on the fore - finger of an alderman ;
to the river black of tuoni ,
methought that of these visionary flowers
to break men 's brotherhood ;
called his two eldest children to his side ,
when rude king frost will hold tyrranic reign ,
erewhile on earth so haughty and so proud .
sixteen ! and life to thee looks bright and fair;--
we are but saints , ' the hermits said ;
fled over adria to th ' hesperian fields ,
to make the smile so bright ?
the while the day is warm and clear ,
which through the ' etherial concave comes rejoicing . "
to his low fountain in the wilderness ?
how strange this mass of ancient treasures ,
still to those courts my footsteps turn ,
by pure white flakes , all trackless and untrodden .
and to jumala resign me ;
and what ? can he avouch , or answer what he claimed?[nu ]
and striking , mastered by her woes ,
_ an ode to be read on the laying of the foundation stone of
ere the god of torment taught her
beheld in a glorious vision the form
woe him that cunning trades in hearts contrives !
the purpose of the foe to spy .
you shall breathe from urgent lips ,
shall often visit and make love in and flit ;
slowly opens . marian steals in . elinor rises and confronts
tradition suffer me
an idle dream , with only longings fraught ;
and the people of the village .
and are hurried ashore with a full flowing sail ;
and , thro ' its thick locks , showed the deadly white ,
from the young spinster , just come _ out _ ,
when i am all alone
to keep fresh water , but the country seems
but her true love had angel 's eyes ,
peeped slyly out as todd went by .
ah wish'd his keease he d been mah awn ,
came out upon the world .   when a faint beam
she said " come again
expos'd to furies and to chances thrown .
her child at play . "
there sit not , and reproach us as unclean .
quam pallas cunctis artibus erudiit .
and the light that grows dimmer and dimmer --
by the coarse friction of the sea ,
and she ground the cruiser 's side .
of asius , and oenomäus , led them on .
are gentle rebecca ’s sweet gales of love .
to garnish the martyr and patriot 's tomb :
thy smile is a warm light that shines to bless ,
abati , bocca degli , xxxii . 106 .
to house and garden , field and lawn ,
a long , loose , straggling caravan ,
thunder and floods : new light
bacchus - mad with happiness who burns to meet his maid .
must fall , the wine - press must be trod ,
naught seems impossible , no thought too high ,
nor of your fair love have one sight ,
did you ever see such a thing in your life
vpon both parts it furiously is fought ,
the very blacks about the town that used to cadge for grub ,
quickly broke , and combed , and smoothed it ,
as yet , he said , he had only kissed her hand ,
turned dimple breasts , such beauty of one birth
with eager hope they hastened on , and plied across the plain ;
and yet , in spite of stubborn aymon 's no ,
that night when all the gates were shut to city and to throne ,
the proud acquaintance they disown'd .
he added : " time is now we quit the wood .
for smoke that half obscured , the circling stars
shirt - sleeves in the small , stuffy shop opening directly from the
birr , force , vigor .
but like a person of some high account ;
pyrmont 's extremely full , i hear ;
betwixt the armies ; i would see more nigh
under general notions , and with -- yes ! with written labels
then said unto the page , hight billy ramus ,
he who is standing
nor ointement that woulde cleanse or bite ,
whose lights are fled ,
summer nights at grandpa's -- ain't it fun ter lay
my boyhood 's home
which , when our autumn cometh , as it must ,
pour out the vials of pestilence ,
mines of gold
then they began to sing
we seek for slumbering trout
enough for me to feel
at times , and have strange thoughts about the stars ,
these make thy friends , and on their aid rely .
the dry north - east , and every blast to showers
selfishly to further thereby .
for never a man who can go it alone ,
an ' watch 'em dive i ' t ' watter widoot fear .
into transparent crystal , bright and clear .
achilles thus his speech to priam turn'd .
and all his stolid face was eddied o'er
remarks , of which the most reasonable is that some of the lines
her wild lips curve and quiver ,
“ brother , bring hither from the wood
of wild thoughts and want and sorrow .
the legions in the van already meet
that stern fate ’s favour may be won ?
sure thou art come p'er far - off seas ,
that he appear'd to me an otter .   each
that schoolhouse should be raised from the ground--
he said .   i liked the way he talked .
the pure bright young moon 's thread ,
of the rejoicing followers ; gunther the noisy rout
looks rather like a phantom now ,
nearer , perhaps , than they again will be ,
of old anchises , in the ' elysian bower ,
when we came in by glasgow toun
and with speed it darted forward .
which last is a scheme of paper money ,
of all things is with us , and sees us , and hears ?
blypes , shreds .
gem - studded ; i made her a bed on a bedstead of gold .
while on its neck the reins unheeded flow ,
happy crib , that wert alone
it made him take a knot !
that sways to and fro ,
hi ! but here 's a squadron a - rowing on the sea--
telemachus in triumph sails the main .
and there is movement , to and fro ,
forthwith , upstarting , from the couch i flew ,
they face the sun , not tremble at the gale :
where sunlight was drown'd ,
and from thy tender bosom turned away
but then another spoke :
falls on the seas ,
replied : " let us go there , for they come slowly ,
clouds like far turrets in a dream
a hundred warriors from agylla 's town
out from the leaves of my " lucille "
and prayers , and tears , and bribes , shall plead in vain ;
as mine was -- is ever ,
and just conclude that " fools are fortune 's care : "
in act to smite , were he not controlled .
that looking upon him thou penetrate
but if the favour'd one prove false , oh ! who can then be true ?
and if for me no treasure be amass'd ,
but somewhere , sometime , would be spared
w'en it come to chris'mas day !
great enimy to it , and all the rest
therefore the third and fourth are so ;
what moots it whither mortals turn ?
saw noblest spirits , and goodliest faculties ,
no spirit of human kind was ever sav'd . "
she sits and entertaines her eye
with that song of " i love you , " my little - oh - dear !
so that he soffre mot algate
me the summertime displeases ,
and feel the pulse of the silences , and stand elate once more
saw you with spreading mantle covering the world . )
who prepares the toothsome dinner ,
all that are capable of pleasure pleased ,
flaming horse of mighty hisi ,
no doubt this patience , when the world is damning us ,
hard conflict ! when calamity and age
on tortured ugliness that twists and cries ;
save where that pearly whiteness
the bottom rich , and sands that golden been ,
there came three wise men riding from the east ;
hulli - lulli - li - lo !
and there 's never a may but one .
by the light o ' the moon !
sin ' that day michael^2 did you pierce ,
priests , and poets , as the national spirit grew conscious
to them it comforted !
king janak speaks , dread liege , by us :
we light our candles to that lord
curvos viarum qui retorsit tramites
the epitaph of glory fled ,
now is best leisure
ah , love ! in some far garden ,
or taste the old october brown and bright .
oh ! still the maniac hears the blast ,
alike are known
their best high - churchman , with no faith in works ,
there was i lately about the middest of may ,
the golden spear his carcass passed inside ;
let me move slowly through the street ,
divide the ground , and short is the delay .
take his goodwill and fellowship to help thee in thy rede .
what to me in these things is understood ,
from the land of the ojibways ,
some were at cards , and some at dice ,
to me which sounded strangely sweet .
grant that the evil of the world may ne'er
this is my object -- i repeat-- "
angels shall count them , and earth shall sigh
vex those who in the wood remain :
though his own searching mind before
i have seen him face to face
a third--"to thee and me , love ! "
balancing of large blocks of syllables ) is an essential
upon the fated mountain this same eve ;
and the twin notes thus tuned their ditty , -
and them safe to the widow conveyed ;
he wooed her with the work of his hands ,
jocund , the face of nature smiles , and gay ;
they swooped on that country ,
hast thou forgotten many a day ,
long centuries have come and gone .
so i keep coming back , to my old hoosier shack ,
nice is a slave , by christian yoke oppressed ;
the wordless sorrow comfort in them sees ,
as who pursued with yell and blow
equal to that afforded him by this song . but a still greater joy
with the banner and pennant a - flapping .
and we the wordes have al one ,
the winds at night had made a rout ,
but in perilous plight were we ,
my " bunyan " has been gone .
this evening late , by then the chewing flocks
to woo the springin ' flowers , and to melt the frozen snaw .
cried in ecstatic notes , " o live your life ,
credite mi , nil tam suave bibistis adhuc .
although ' tis but a memory ,
despise him not for lying there ;
you came to me bearing bright roses ,
forerun the royal camp , to trench a field ,
in their rude isle , the spell ordains the germ
and die a double death : mankind incensed ,
received on _ poems of the town _ . among this chorus of praise
who chews the cud but doth not cleave the hoof .
and passively did imitate
“ take off from his neck the collar of gold ,
have you read in the talmud of old ,
with him conferring the king slowly reach'd
loud groaned aeneas , and a mournful cry
they have neared the stream , they have crossed the bridge ,
now by the red , and from the song of her
wan images of passion fill
she made a vow , whereby herselfe she bound ,
for if there be love in heaven with evil to cope,--
how that unknown warriors / now her land had sought ,
twin'd hand in hand in amity .
then with a gilded largess , led my ways
had'st thou but longer stayed , it had been thine
the folly which at times desired
vocal , with here and there a silence , ran
as what she saw when she looked through
as thus i think on all , i see
but does no other lord it at this hour ,
pero cualquier dellas es dulçe gritador ,
their own strict judges , not a word they spare
deeming strange evil in that he did not know .
whether by sea or land , that no one should attack you through
at the feet of laughing water
lxxxiv . " but safe should turnus from the fight once more
so spake the father , and unfoulding bright
the lintel of wet sand with froth .
do n't you know ' tis the baby 's birthday
that we must feign a bliss
on shells , which nymphs from silver sands might cull ,
and that so loudly , that upstarted all
when stung with hunger she embroils the flood ,
as love 's star when it riseth !
and heav'n itself is ravish'd from their eyes .
come , and of the other folk , who hold this city and land , i
the dear
give me tears to keep me clean ,
and brightness : thou on either side appear'd
over damascus every star
" why do you trouble me , dead woman ,
together and gave his orders . " now , my men , " said he , " get
and , when it burns too , we shall see as well
and trust in him who rules above ,
since what your eyes alone can do
shoals of dishonoured dead to tumble and rot
him a moment to stop , as he wished to explain
but as a mortal wound the more doth smart
nor can the blows from outward still conserve ,
like this , thy mind is clear and bright ,
the fraud of men was ever so ,
familiar matter of to - day ?
and , as they yawn through sermon - time , they say ,
my songs around you were the only birds ,
in search of whom they sought :   him there they found
when i was down beside the sea
that provoking young lady of parma .
i ca n't describe , yet _ substantively _ true .
and the black sticks that fence the weirs ,
intus rura micant , manibus quae subdita nullis
of shifting fashion , couldst thy brethren turn
shall say ? yonder men verily care for such things as these ,
jamie quelled the proud foe on the ocean ,
oft , too , when wind is toward , the stars thou'lt see
as it hath fallen overmore
and then the bouncing bets do n't bounce -- i tried them yesterday ,
till when at feast sir garlon likewise asked
now gallants tap their two - edged swords ,
with gladness come , which , weeping , made me haste
that thei ne scholden noght befole
they whispered oft , ' she sleepeth soft'--
in light with soft music nears ?
galloping , dreary duke .
like the rake upon the stubble ,
and will find out the way .
and she stroked his hair
for human force , hurries even _ him _ along ;
as aurum fulminans , it blows vice down .
when winter winds
upon the place of combat watch all night .
all the aspens tried to cut me ,
returned to the argives and brought back word again of all .
wise was the nimble siegfried ; he left them there a space ,
you are new , new , new -- with the promise true
  verbatim from bolingbroke : " men would be angels , and we see in
it has all been told and painted ; as for me , they say i
scentless are thy petals ,
but when the guidance reached its end ,
that pierces me ; for , like excalibar ,
dost thou answer to my kiss ?
when but they pass the portals / are they full quickly slain .
and her boats were manned in silence , and in silence pulled away ,
i 'm a poor singing gentleman , sirs , it is true ,
in terror i clung to the bedpost ,
we are wistful before the pathetic gallantries of his
' twixt the last violet and the earliest rose .
the fury of illustrious hector 's arm .
sing me a song of a lad that is gone ,
one self - denying act , one word
with the last words my lips shall speak ,
trojans and latians vie with like desires
tiny plumes fluttering
contiguous might distemper the whole frame :
for the smallest tarn in the mountains ,
with age and long experience wise ;
and although stockinet
if mem'ry o'er their tomb no trophies raise ,
if little labour , little are our gains ;
sent the tall man on horseback once more unto me ;
flew through the midst of heaven ; the angelick quires ,
the flowers dwelt among their friends ,
` ensample why , see now these wyse clerkes ,
he niver tells her what he thinks ,
vot der tyfel i d meant - und he could n't tell - und der
than what i felt , and spake : ' now forward plod ,
and feed my brain with better things .
and hitch a few minutes , and kind o ' drop
through phrygia once and foreign regions known ;
wilt tha cubedu gla - de on the blue pacific , or rest
and though the beaming smiles may grace
then homeward trudged -- half drunk -- but safe and sound .
and yet to - day i saw thee smiling . how
and the grand view from off its hills ,
while our broad hulks the foamy waves divide .
when faction rear'd her snaky head ,
as night and day ,
doubtless thou know'st the hebrew story--
she does not know
which not the rich earth 's ample round
because thou hast proved thee a false , fickle bride . ”
so sweet a patterne of humanitie :
when will the stars with their linking charms
o tinkling bells ! that lulled with twilight music
is kept , and leaves her clear .
and when grim death draws near him , by his ain fireside ,
i have lost to my god as a man , clear eyed ,
say of him what you please
if they may thus christ 's anger stay :
how they might perchance discover ,
old kaspar 's work was done ,
seek him inquiringly ,
she will not ruth or gentle pity show ,
crowned with her gold hair 's sheen
party and creed
of pikes between the beacon 's crimson glares ;
on the head of me unhappy ,
" and weepest thou , charoba ! shedding tears
chanced to view
fair maidens , i 'll sing you a song ,
valiant , " certes , i declare that it is very great folly to ruin
fer bi t’way ’ at he thumps he macks it fair groan .
an ' if ye mak ' objections at it ,
can i , without so dear a father , live ?
the grave was all the home i had to give .
to which the people standing all about ,
and highly honour'd , i must blame , that thus
new life in bolton priory ;
or to philosopher or poet .
by the guests were emptied quickly ,
she or i but little care !
a coward , who would burden the poor deuce
when the birds from wood and meadow
an ' their spirits baith fled away .
and the dark shades of death his eyes o'erspread .
her giant heart of memory and tears
wherof erli the morwe day
  his fingers , in beauty and slenderness appearing as the _ yed
he , shunning all that crowd , chose to himself
then just to get a rap from burke ,
by the fading light of the dying fire ,
he of old proteus ' hears the cruel use
lo , thus departeth love his lawe ,
what conscience , say , is it in thee ,
it was the sponsor 's turn to stand
to him , or possibly his love desert ,
and thou , put on thy worst and meanest dress
' tis the early april lark ,
where fays of yore their revels wo nt to keep ;
_ 2 _   yet ¦ if one may guess by the ¦ size of his calf , sir ,
but left them , like slaves , to be lash'd and corrected .
and in his pockets , too ,
quem clotho niueis benigna pensis ,
turn to ice thy feet and ankles . "
who will eat thee .
on thee he leaves ;
go on , thou troubled memory , wander on !
the latest sunbeams , which the night pursues ,
and the sun 's face so shaded , and with mists
once upon a time , says the tale , there was a great godly man , a
he shook his forehead ; and , " how long , " he said ,
and a letter may alter the plans we arranged
and the heart that we loved with a boundless love
his eyes were changeful ; for the gloom of gray
astern and to leeward lies the land ,
his country and his king ;
that i 'm as tired as they are ....
but that events now proved him wise to come .
sensit . eam circum milesia vellera nymphae
when clear falls the moonlight ,
hast for so long endured of thorns the crown ;
the gourmand gnaws in haste because
received more than all [ flowers ] , it loved more than ever ,
as on a flower that opens to the day ;
seemed walter ; never over - merry he .
and from a cutty pipe 's puffing bubbles on the breeze ;
never was heart in such devotion bound ,
through him we must be cleansed and purified ,
that i may have great sonnets on my lips !
he knew not where they trod , on earth or air . ]
then you 'll think of flirtation and old gee 's rock ,
beneath arabia 's skies :
but i soon hid among the brakes ,
an ' friends my adversity 's tested ,
ia'goo , a great boaster and story - teller
he seem'd as if restored to sight ,
or like the borealis race ,
the threshold of god 's door
sons of pedantry and pride ;
venus impudica , the mexican ,
beat by the rain these , dog - like , yelp and shout ,
tall candles and set them aflame
in that case the local name is demonstrably earlier than the
and hear a burst of that high song
and agamemnon , with his foot the corse
antigenes , then worthy to be loved ,
swift let us try if phantoms of the air ,
low in the stillness , and by that soft air
a money - measured heart ,
to _ greek _ or _ latin tongues _ without pretence ,
up and down .
long life to śunahśepha gave .
little hairy dogs
where , through the darkness of that dismal seat
for either , what most lived within each breast
_ the shameless torch of wild desire is lit _ ,
his pinnace in the haven of marseilles .
" _ fortissimi belgae_."--a moon ago !
a wraith , that whispering of the quiet dead ,
and hear the woods that round thee lie
vas getook py gorpral 's guard .
of darkened russia , watching long in vain ,
the load of children , even as i had borne
has dimmed her radiant lamp to feeblest spark .
‘ no , no , let us play , for it is yet day ,
and people saw i through the circular valley ,
guns , knives and blankets , prized past all belief ,
unsanctioned by thy smile , shall die away
with calmness not of wisdom , all my soul
for scribe the prophet of the morning , far
_ we _ want the man who loved
" her consort beatrice , while she has breath ,
and loved the cackle of talk and the true word uttered in fun ;
meat , sitting quietly in the hall . and it shall be the
her soothed limbs , and soul fatigued away ;
the captain cried , " quack , quack ! "
the paths of gods what mortal can survey ?
and birth and death to thee are known ,
" vain thought conceiv'st thou .   that ignoble life ,
sings his braces into reed - grass ,
till latins , saved once more , their plighted word betray .
that teach the rustic moralist to die .
take it quick !   oh , it will warm you till the little
nor need they struggle after wealth and fame ;
what time were better to begin a war
scathed by the curses of unnatural toil ;
( from which was london born ) ;
oddsbodikins ! ' tis pretty cool !
the fields , the streams , the skies , are fair , vol . v. , 267 .
should she refuse , i 'll lay my dead
and richest gifts to others gave ,
what can i do but dive again , again -- again--
= halwes= , shrines ( holies ) .
when the most holy suffer'd .   then the words
and where is he would falter ,
and the current bears us along the while
i listen'd to ; that cry
on rummaging over some old papers i lighted on a ms . of my early
with the fleece of tyrian stain !
behind it is the garden ground ,
out of my heart . there 's something ails our colt
within his company of monks did wait ,
and so , to wind the tale up short ,
gives me enough to think a summer through .
for statues one , and one for aphorisms
why , she sweetly smiled and answered ,
and mony mae we hope to be .
v. 121 .   constance . ]   daughter of ruggieri , king of sicily , who ,
and deeper vengeance on th ' immortals fall'n ,
there were your roses ! but above it all
and will no more her heart 's proud triumph feed ;
in posting next for duty , and sending a scout
i 've but ole burthel to by solg--
laughs out of pearl - lights through a golden ray ,
and ere yon bells beganne to play
o mielikki , forest - hostess ,
but many a sage his aid will lend ,
have full as oft no meaning , or the same .
that not the maiden , but the wife
laved by vast depths that swell on either side
haste and help this helpless maiden ! "
" an hour will come when sight of such sweet nook
or wha will tent the waifs and crocks ,
looks not like madness:--wretches of that stamp
o , beauty , are you not enough ?
see running , jumping , highland fling ,
that god , the maker , should true worship have ,
and give to me the glue ,
tamed by my skill , when on the glaucous gold
and in cold i shake and tremble ,
and she has snooded her yellow hair
whence arose thy tongue of anger r
a woman lives by intuition .
his yron cote , all overgrowne with rust ,
they glided past , they glided fast ,
ne þe swetnesse of somer , ne þe sadde wynt{er } ,
in your gospelling glooms , -- to be
no question but doll 's cheeks would soon roast dry , 407 .
and the rest of the world was wrapp'd in repose ,
cries : " love and glory!"--then we run aground .
the bridges , till the houses ' walls
then , when before the yellow screen
though on her cheek the traces lay
with that , up caught the maiden a cord with fell intent
“ in the rock 's hollow womb , and ( wond'rous sight ! )
look at him , now the fourth day 's come
as hope of love within her heart did rise ;
for clear , wild grey eyes !
with a luminous lamp within suspended ,
to tell his story to his countrymen ,
the day - glimpse glimmers on the lawn ,
which is above there , runneth unto love ,
yarkit at the wark , _ wrought with vigour _ .
and she held o'er the moors to spin ;
which springs up for a season and then dies . "
" sir , he derides
this service will be of such eminence
they lasted just as long , i do believe ,
one thing i know ; that whereas i was blind ,
than mailie dead .
i stand at the wheel , and with eager eye
upstream to find,--what i already knew,--
save the cricket on the hearth ,
' father , ' she says , ' though in me you behold
array thy troops ; for here the city wall ,
to the master of all singing !
that no evil may o'ertake us . "
like sighs exhaled in eager atmosphere .
his hound from the chase .
it 's a general rule ,
rearing stiff , the warrior host ,
flammis corusci fulguris uibratior ,
i , the cast out , dismissed and dispossessed .
and many matters feigned and flattering lies ;
triumphant out of this infernal pit
shorn in one moment like a sunset sky .
that issue from threadneedle street .
what things we view , and earth 's decree withstand ,
distinct midst them all the lovely voice
the evening and the morning
and the women brought their suppers out
and fir'd with joy , parnassus ' bloomy god
peace upon peace , like wave upon wave ,
let love 's sweet tenderness relieve war 's cruel crimson clutch ,
hell can not bear the bright array ,
for glory by that king of babylon
the eye that looks on the world .
and mine was the foot to falter ;
and now beyond the mountains
parson , and clerk , and father to the bride!--
then father grew so fearful
this tomb , inscrib'd to gentle parnell 's name ,
best of all the noble youths in ithaca ; wherefore vultures
a holy silence reigned around ,
hast thou , o ' the sudden , brutalized their sense ?
a little brook , whose crimson'd wave yet lifts
forbid the repetition , heaven !
and with his words unfolded nature 's source .
" i eased in asia the nizam
that roses and the june are here ?
all day wenten tho children two ,
nor note the hours that winged fly .
and lo ! the third gray morning shone
yon distant isle will often hail :
that blooms in your boughs ;
jove gave the signal of success to troy .
again , in genuine purity she shines ,
you can ride the old horse over to my grave across the dip
' tis the trysting - place of yore ;
little they reckoned privation , hunger or hardship or cold ,
the cocktail and the canvasback .
of his anger divine
their friendly welcome at the palace - gate ,
and plaint of an unreal defeat .
algate a foot is hameled of thy sorwe . '
that misthress biddy rooney for o'brine did pour ;
immortality .
where i do keep , that no one may descry ,
in dewy grasses glistened ; and the hair
that night we did not sleep ,
beneath its sway th ' umbrageous wood resound :
and started stirring up his petroleum ,
provided always your great goodness still
you see ,
on the bat 's back i do fly
at the end of the performance ;
but ere steel - point met flesh , tall jacques grillon
there 's one who ought to enter in ,
and leave a memory of great deeds behind us .
the trembling world , and shakes the steady poles .
papa , mamma , little sister
and lives -- the king of kings !
as black as stevenson 's ink ,
and still each year , as popery 's curse
there is no less that state of air composed ,
once again are opportunities afforded
there grows it ever ,
breste ,          brast , borst ,        brusten , bursten .
brown , stuart : owner of lincoln portrait , 82 .
that are so much misunderstood . )
peisander struck , but drove not through the spear ;
the star of even shines bright and far ,
affrighted then they did behold
his annual journey ; and , through every light
chorus : so early in the morning , & c.
of all mankind . i should , myself , transgress ,
throughout the week the members freely gave
" as a wild flock of pigeons , to their food
me , cut down before our city , and my three own dear brothers
_ evening brings us all at last ,
thenceforth to speculations high or deep
of strata , should show the wonder - worth
friendly adieux end this note , and our little comedy with it .
at alisandre < 6 > he was when it was won .
and rend his chain apart .
full beauties , might well make the hearer able to repeat , as it
then drop the paste ,
but -- a seaman fired yon beacon - light !
among hem thre in pourpartie
out of the sound of battles , near to the end of day ,
for birds have least of the dust that gave them birth ,
rang trebly dear in that outlandish spot .
de same ez his countenance had been greased .
to hear the tidings of my friend ,
forgotten long , now suddenly come true .
and around him the suggema ,
the stranger accepted the invitation , and after a little more
not mindless of that distant age , renowned ,
the tod reply'd upon the hill ,
his violin , which trembles like a lyre ,
as the worst of the venom left my lips ,
this ca nt about posterity i hate ;
she spoke no word again .
the childless matrons are , long since , awake ,
when twilight wrapped the waters
lying upon him , and it sets on fire whomsoever it encounters . my
i know him
her bidding , and encounter once again
but , were his lady there , to lend her aid .
who , e'en in words unfetter'd , might at full
an ' told us all about the work , an ' how ' twas gettin ' on ,
his idol - canker seated is :
and sweet that dwelling rests upon the brow
and anna flattered mother on her son ,
his checks were fallen in ,
" i will write it thus :
the drink which brangwein hem betok ,
they saw him slip and stumble ,
( o god , and i must see her fade ,
a maid whom there were none to praise
unto ways of truth and knowledge .
his diligence and quick dispatch ;
neglecting , not the living , but the dead ?
and his voice died down slowly from exhaustion .
a heavenly voice breathed round her from above ,
deserves to break your rest !
for social rank , when thus e'en monarchs deign
sisters came to draw the drag - net ;
for the soul your death has daggered . "
ah ! do not , julia , turn away ;
since last that deep heart knocked at mine .
mrs . g. i understand . pip , will you tell me something ?
it will be gone .   the current of the river
and ere that bird his mercy begs ,
and eighty feet on high
the thing they know not intone ;
sweeps the wide earth , and tramples o’er mankind ,
by the fall of silver showers ;
of costly sacrifice ; and pouring forth
he breathes more flame
for threescore years ; whose word of praise was fame ,
laughing , leaping , sparkling with the spray ;
frown when the autumn days strike us all ruthlessly bare .
' tis hops that give a bitterness to beer--
she that nursed me in my cradle ,
_ i maked up a fairy - tale , _
as my thought turns again to what i saw ,
in his heart a stony burden ,
beneath that fresh and springing bower
this remark were often making
that oft hast heard the death - ax sound ,
and , " what do you call it ? " asked one . " i thought i was dead . "
' twas not for him in evil days some ray
forget them not , nor mourn them so ,
just when the war was growing hot ,
by my fire still brightly burning ,
you had no thought or presage
of the sailor 's heart ,
first row of ships , but they made a stand by their tents without
and sharp assault , meanwhile the town oppressed ,
vvhich must supplanted be with speed
unto those christian cavaliers , as said :
the measure of my doings at thy lips ,
i once thought that i lov'd you well--
lie scentless and dead .
and a tunny - fish shall be
because most choicely ; for as great a store
and , while it dazzles , wounds the mental sight :
" make room for a tired little fellow ,
( 5 )   " hawart " and " iring " , adventure xxii , notes 6 and 7 .
is my fond fantastic song .
the blackened walls with ivy all o'ergrown ;
lest he forget in later life these things ,
danube with a shout of power
so she repeated soft her poet 's line ,
for daily with my growing store
array'd in all their rural pride ,
for a fallen chief .
the secrets of the hawthorn ,
for thou hadst seen what tears upon man 's face
with our faint hearts the mountain strives ;
mrs . woods , and mr . w. b. yeats ; to the earl of crewe for a poem
charles , no less eloquent upon his side ,
the crash of ruin , and the loss of all
it may float , and pass in safety !
than the army of worms that gnawed below ;
of rock and fire the scroll ,
one book we know such fun invokes ,
he paus'd ; and , while with wond'ring eyes they view'd
we were happy on that freehold on the plain .
thou possess thyself of the keys and lead her forth with human
a growing grief .
creep awa ' , my bairnie , creep afore ye gang ,
stanza cxxxviii.-cli . " the seal is set.--now welcome , thou dread
so living that it shall tremble in its aspect to thee .
it has given me a duty to perform .
respiciat , montis neu dedignetur adire ,
why mock me , bessy bell ?
kisses or words , both sensual , which shall be
then ( till the marriage - rites proclaimed
the illustrious chiefs in council . at his side
when hearts and flowers are both in season ,
added that whitefoord did not , as he claimed , originate the
a little angel child ,
where still thy voice is heard to weep ,
where are the braveries , fresh or frayed ?
hir gyftys to mankynde frely offrynge
and the american romanticist , emerson , said of the poet ,
ringed by a bowery flowery angel - brood ,
and when it clears , her form appears
válmíki , graceful speaker , heard ,
nympharum semper cupidis defende rapinis
on a dung - hill beside his stable ;
upon clergie an he d of bras
but , gross of intellect , suspicion none
and cry'd , " mantuan ! i am thy countryman
here pinks with spices in their throats
he shook himself well , and then struggled to find
and how concluded by the godlike man :
with fifty lads to hoist the sail ,
oh , grateful for the good his bounty gave ,
and then , my dears , he will bid us good bye
and thus again his answer made :
within her master 's snug abode .
of old euphrates to the brook that parts
go hard with him . i shall not shun him , but will fight him , to
( while roaring round , invisible cataracts fall ) ;
and , glorious from his foes ’ defeat ,
though dark the soul be tossed ,
within the world 's turmoil :
characteristic traits of his chief , in whom peaceful
boomlay , boomlay , boomlay , boom ,
no rainbow colours here , or silken tale :
the night wind sweeps through all the room ,
and shaketh his head .
those embers , like stars from the firmament cast ?
believe , and taste the pleasure of a god ;
among you that can turn to music now
percussit thyrso laudis spes magna meum cor
rutledge ! resigns his station here .
wha twists his gruntle wi ' a glunch
amid the martial ranks of chivalry .
the flower grew
et capitolinis iniecit sedibus ignis .
make an eternal spring !
storm , such as drove her under moonless heavens
as one in fear .
there , safe arrived , we turn about
faces of goat or sheep or bull--
unheard of yet in any chronicle ,
in the leafy darkness of the place ,
the palace - gates burst open , and the foe
and drove the wedge and toiled amain .
into the blue vault of the daylight
--but ere throughout the town at large
but long their like had loved the garden well ;
and saw him peep within ;
glooms that enhance and glorify this earth .
sighing , oh ! sighing .
is as her spotless soul , refin'd .
or smell like to a mead new - shorn ,
not less but more heroick than the wrath
the theme is so pleasant ;
about the right divine how far we should
ships which had been damaged in a gale . he said ulysses would
quorum per ripas nebuloso lumine marcent
whose purple rays th ' achaemenes adore ;
th ' advice brought many a champion sorrow and mortal woe .
for i 'll hang out my lamp again , when his begins to burn . "
still quite two - thirds i hope will be forgot .
est oculis , seu quid carius est oculis .
belua ; tum uiuo squalentia murice terga
they had examined it thoroughly , they both of them wept about
" o even as here thou art , aslumber in death ,
" between tupino , and the wave , that falls
pollute with sinful blame ,
to love 's own secrecy;_--
when squeezing past the men from the front - line :
yea , were he not crowned king , coward , and fool . '
pass'd by you the good enoch , on his road
upon trustworthy foes respect bestow ;
who greets you , and informs you , and assures .
for so wel can ther noman slyke
that white hand of thine
" thy golden sheaves are empty air . "
of love 's unbroken eloquence !
like wild beasts trapped and stabbed within a fold
so very much endears ,
i came of honest parents ,
if you must deploy your skirmish line with nothing in your dome ,
and my spirit , one desire .
the pulses throbbing .
there lives ; rich or poor , a success .
_ no captain can do very wrong who indicates by guns--
to clasp and strike a slackened lyre ,
wagemin , the thief of cornfields ,
to flutter in a kinder sky .
then did i turn from her , heart - sick with fear ;
nor ross would be argyle , nor toland
between the door and him ,
why cease the rapture - breathing strains to soar ?
marcia , with julia and cornelia there ;
" sparrows at your luscious store ! "
she sees the angels in the air
bird of the gale ,
close - seam'd , and mention what thou dost to none .
let not shark , nor vicious sea - dog
or over - cold annihilates the charm .
dere hides a trink so clear ,
and i , who watch them , feel their song
mary sees , sympathising
unceasing thunder and eternal foam ?
but who is he observes them ?   none ; not he ,
sic pugnum logices stringere , sic decuit .
divine ulysses ! ask no mortal guide .
walks hand in hand with charity ;
in neither clime , time , blood , with her defender ;
to her are known
of far deluging glory , and the air
o that , if struck , then struck with glorious wounds ,
the lapithæ . there are two other persons mentioned in ancient
more senseles then her very monument ,
so many mounds of mournful years ago
who , with the burthen of his cares ,
i have lain in the nest of the swan ,
’ twor them ’ at troubled t’parish , john ,
the joy that he doth bring ,
who may conduct me thither ; there my task
and my face corrected .
both in and out of season ,
as much of body as in lump of lead ,
are rounds by which we may ascend .
and will cast down her eye
as it rose o'er ragged mountain .
achillas plunged his blade , nor sound nor cry
but uselessly i sit all day
to sate the swinish appetite ! "
breathe on , breathe on , thou languid strain ,
and bows and shells , in fair array :
the earth will not be green for living men,--
but annie from her baby 's forehead clipt
for my brothers ' tender care
the _ blazon _ beaming dreadful at my breast ;
why , i could run there in the dinner hour . '
your breasts ,
the light is listening ;
' twas a cheery like sicht as the bonny fire - licht
into long , shining signals from the panes
to give the pledge , and yet be pined
abominable misprints in the first number , your ground would
violet , little violet ,
more loud than before
only a line in the paper ,
strange sounds are out upon the breeze ,
he is so passionless in sleep ,
our honest ancestors are come to take the air .
costly appear the luckless ornament ;
it is not for your silver bright ,
that mean so very much to me .
grim mars of awful voice did not yet know that his son had
i thought you loved me just as well ;
been killed in battle , with their armour still smirched with
shuddered at the words they uttered ,
at her feet , in the light of her fair english face .
are a certain sign to me
by humiliation and strong sufferance
the beck grows wider and swift and deep :
his eyes shot sparklets like the polar morn .
in spite of gravity , and sage remark
  " we pitched our tents among some little hills where there was a
every good action and its contrary . "
loyal to god and nation .
giovanna nor none else have care for me ,
so sweet he flies away full honey laden ,
a - ti - il d'héroine plus touchante , plus aimable que sîta ? je ne le
_ so he fines the hearts of men . _
from height to height ' tis heard ;
and hurrying from his castle , with a cry
great multitudes therefore were joyned
and the color 's kind er faded , and it 's sort er worn and old ,
instat terminus et diem
refresh'd , and claim thy master 's thanks and gold.--
said the lively lemminkainen ,
ye gentle breezes , saftly blaw ,
which learn'd from this example not to fly
and love which lead us towards the infinity
and a good god , for this stranger
the birch , most shy and lady - like of trees ,
gasping upon a bench , there came still more
stood before the “ holy of holies . ” ]
has tolled for dear departed ones the
an ' sum cry oot ' tis all a lee ,
" when beside thee walked the solemn plesiosaurus ,
god knows i 've muffed some easy chances
_ eve . _ shall i be mother of the coming life ?
tho was , and thider wolde he gon :
with plenteous _ branches _ round the pillar twine ;
shines forth in kindness for me , talks and laughs--
nor marched — for ráma ’s hest they feared
pride in thy parts provokes thee to contest
the first that played on harpe or on orgone
warrior trusty , the treasures held ,
and yet more swift our dear dead drift
bounds forth and , master of the open plain ,
life was but sombre , dull and grey ;
a suitor to   redeem his suff'ring friend ,
and echoes aimless through the busy din :
and some approach the threshold whose looks are blank with fear ,
he ordered captain farmer to chase the foreign foe ,
and to this bordeller hir solde .
the mountain ring , like sapphires o'er the sea ,
come , my corinna , come ; and , coming , mark
and all my illusions have vanished away .
" ulysses , " said minerva , " noble son of laertes , think how you
but now the achaeans cast the hawsers loose
the ocean of song heaves and glitters before him ,
on the right the aloe 's seen .
with flattery 's insinuating art
my life i would lay down for thee !
well loved that splendid monarch aye
while i , bob fudge , esquire , shall ride
he in the thicket aimed -- the gun ran husk ;
sublime in grace , in majesty severe ,
crept on and on all silently ,
" brisk handling of our oars soon carried us out into the sea , but
in mantua there is rejoicing
respice !   nonne vides ut erostratus alter ad aedem
the genii of the stream :
the angel moved those bands of valour tried ,
fairest , noblest , best of all ,
his heart was luminous with love--
and through the corn and clover
here they be .
every fort and every wall ,
now is the lubber tame !
and i ca n't count the obstinate nymphs that he brought over ,
her bosom was the driven snaw ,
and dressing like a blue ;
and mend the pots and kettles of mankind ,
that the visage or countenance had not a nose ,
a hoarse shout answered them across the bare woods .
lady ! in this night of june ,
as far as buttons may .
you and i of time are not afraid .
light is the burden love lays on ;
little white hand , like a flake of snow ,
with the thymy scented grasses .
saw the yellow perch , the sahwa ,
but , as he gazed , it faded from his sight ,
to follow right not fate ; but first of all
come back , come back for a single hour ,
mackesy . all the station knows it .
" she lay like some unkenned - of isle
" _ thou takest home coming ; for thy soul shall know _
beneath the azure canopy ,
the past was buried too deep to fear .
ah ! what good priests to siegfried the last sad duties paid !
quam tum saepe magis fulgore expalluit auri,--
the dreaded infant 's hand ;
polites , paris , agathon , he calls ;
capt . g. a little before the dawn , dear .
no idle gods for such a land -
the robin woke from his slumber ,
on her watery couch of joyance ,
in the rocks the moon i 'll carry ,
from whose branches trailed the mosses ,
i hear my little brown wife in the nest
we took but ae kiss , and i bad him gang away ;
the proud are taught to taste of pain ,
thrice he hath danced with her .
all of the things i abhor
example of memory as leading to the ideal -- amidst life , however
when to the lochs the curlers flock ,
would you only give him credence ,
through me among the people lost for aye .
and full ranunculus of glowing red
he marvels at the gates , the roar and rattle of the ways .
of all their hours , as they run on
for battle only , and that in this life
" little blue - ribbons ! " we call her that
as soon as it is light .
that little children might be bold
it may be you wait your time , beast ,
it was you who killed wenonah ,
if the crystal of pure thought must fall in our
of whom , as actors in old scenes ,
the elements can hallow .
' the way is long and rugged the ascent ,
when the grim savage , to his rifled den
till joy is almost pain ;
with the speech of the flogged henchman , here named evan ,
for in the market - place , one dusk of day ,
those vermin of the night , this moment sung ,
with war - worn body aye in battle 's van .
and his dealings with the people ,
on a hill - top all alone ,
his eyes questioned treadway .
the hosses in theyr stalls below -- the clover overhead!--
i wake:--no more i hear , no more i view ,
" with them was i , their new - born helpless heir ,
wild dryad ! all unconscious of thy tree ,
death his vast sithe with sweep enormous wields ,
and i remembered not
hov schulde þ{o}u com to his kyth bot if þ{o}u clene were ?
and dead to the lash of the dream .
and the fragments of the cover ,
and from the characters divide my sight .
a gleam of crimson tinged its braided snow ;
about my health they inquired ;
thus gravely talked the matter o'er :
os - noi'nen .    a synonym of wainola 's hero .
with whom i converse day by day .
haste to come , our work to share .
a heart free from thoughts of another .   say , then ,
fixed to the solid upper sphere , my friends ,
your winding sheet .
must hang upon a blasted tree ;
_ that _ will refresh and gladden all our race .
blossom not thorns and flowers not blood should break .
what ship could live in such a sea !
who have preceded me in simony ,
he who hath , be bountiful
of jove - born pallas , who between the sons
lucy locket lost her pocket ,
with their own blood and their articulations .
" but let me scrape the dirt away
finer skies than mine have set ?
that sparkle on the rugged eastern slope .
between peebles and innerleithen , he was frequently
rose incarnate , rose stupide et pleine de santé ,
toys with the lilac pretty maids ;
sharp and keen — nine gray and noble falcons .
where i 'll not quake or quaver ,
and , from her bower of beauty , walks eve
with names , which he scholde wite ,
and the court .
for joy is the breath
must be to roam the streets ; some hand humane
rest here awhile , not yet the eve is still ,
to the poppy - plains keeping
to sever for years ,
and strength , to perfect what it dreamed of here
that he hath quite forgot how to go there .
entertained by the multitude . plato remarked that few , even in
while from the towers night birds are faintly calling .
held not in , and , in opposition to the others , said to him , " if
for auld , & c.
remainder to the children of the sons .
and on earth we wander , groping , reeling ;
more than that , had often been
the port . fair breezes , blowing from the west ,
that browns and dwindles as the wave goes home ;
they walk out of the wood , showering shadows on flowers .
pure gospel institutions , sanctified
then weep not thus , for the moment is blest
fulfils with awe the soul 's despair unweeping :
in phrase which was divinely moulded ;
for 350 winters of this life after the flood : then he passed
methinks it looks too rich and gay
the grave was dug ; the mason came
oh ! crowd us , blessed melodies ,
thrice upon the hill he blew it ,
dear friends , to this our social feast ,
let the little feet go faster
quitlacatilia in cozcatl quetzalli oncan yoliua , tlacatiua .
digresse no farther least thou proue obsceane ,
if you 've good friends to aid you , ' twill soon be time to show .
not a man in the town held opinions , like him :
and i gaze ,
to the false light that treacherous fishers show ,
i guess i mentioned in my last some o ' the nateral feeturs
a visit , and , if fortune takes
man to man , he made harangue ,
changed as the earth is changed
but when it comes to eating i do n't hunger much for style ;
pleased highly those infernal states , and joy
that there a standing army might reside )
their brows with shame and sorrow overcast ,
the lordly mountains soar in scorn
" help me out ! help me out -- i have broken my bones ! "
or , if the trees are rather far ,
where it will break at last .
twilight on water , tenderness of trees ,
do you take upon you to shut up the general channel , in which
of fire their whirling weapons clashing wove
may rise to heaven and rest me there .
_ thee _ , the soft nations round the warm levant
in their breasts . " here , for weeping , she scarcely could speak ,
the nostrils of his steed are brown
and the wind is a whip that the winter cracks ,
to seal them safe from tears .
unequivocally warm .
“ son now to daunus , my diminish'd host
on sunday to church you go , each with a book of prayer :
she found the remnants of his hat ,
an ' as we went a - joggin ' down i could n't help but
the suitors shall enjoy , for whom i drudge ,
libido sordens , inverecundus lepos ,
had disappeared ; and so that battle sore
chief leader of the cretans , brazen - mail'd
alastor , chromius , pelagon the vast ,
because the soul shines through tempered and mitigate :
thou dirge , that tellest beauty she must die .
the spacious earth yields but she knew its powers ,
these words unuttered , save to his soul 's dread :
on this my bridal night when i would get agone from sorrow
who oft as undeservedly enthrall
she flew ; the light air winnowing with her wings
beyond the din of earth 's discordant jar--
and if some man cloth them well to day
_ comus . _ two such i saw , what time the labored ox
your objection , my dear sir , to the passages in my song of " logan
mankind are formed with different souls :
his fiery eyes in fury rolled ,
her in the direction of the keel ; but there was a backstay of
prodigious throat , for which whole boars are drest ;
of hives that great with honey go ,
each individual seeks a sev'ral goal ;
and of that second region will i sing ,
yield shrinking girlhood up to graybeard sin ;
from fire the only hope of our return .
the fish , and the lone falcon perched afar
had with[8:6 ] the dying scene expir'd his name .
and where the moon is marvelled at for hours !
from their cradles steep
doth lead its sweet waters along .
swinging in air its precious fruit ,
of the true words i utter'd .   in both arms
gazing intent as soon as breaks the dawn :
" o ' cantie single men ! "
and the children not be chanting
( as second horsemen ) , shaving there .
vince fortunam , dubiasque _ nolli _ ,
the gossips , marveling much what this might mean ,
the breasts that were lit with life and the lips so near ;
to see the shops , and walk about ;
orange and green will carry the day .
but still i heard them wander up and down
ardour , endurance and relief ;
the primal four ,
repeating phrases with a kind of pleasure . . .
the wavelets ere they slept .
innumerable of broad - fronted beeves ,
that life , without this cheering ray ,
life 's a sweet fiddle :   but we 're a batch
who have disobeyed the sea - king ,
it seems so long ago,--
the man who does not know them well
non ví en la frontera ,
a seat adorn'd with furry spoils she placed :
in some mississippi swamp ,
there lies a place , of paris little wide ,
than sayth he i thought it wolde nat haue be so
i blush to walk among the race of men . "
to guard and bless and sanctify .
humming like a swarm of insects ,
my journeyings were brought to jericho :
for the lord is my upholder ,
and reading proudhon in between .
struck through , and tells his passion 's bashful dawn
that ne'er went out by day or night :
from the blue - back of manala .
yon critic , too -- but whither do i run ?
gathered one day then a second ;
abroad they find , who cherish it at home .
or you may inveigle
to your infant mind
signifies only a mask , in a sense not known to the romans , by
and none be left but he and i.
that rung as he came dancing on .
whereon the spirit glideth unto heaven
deed be done knows news thereof .
when safe returned each had a tale to tell
of his fader beynge to hym obedyent
and if you want a shindy ,
look ! they are rising in revolt against you !   speak
you ’ll see .
at once to raise our rev'rence and delight ,
that hem avaunte of wommen , and by name ,
i wadna gi'e my ain wife
she wears a quaint little scarlet cap ,
far , as is measur'd for a mile on earth ,
the dance till daylight gleam again ?
the brave saint giles , whom god made marvellous ,
but well i know her sinless mind
wake up !   wake up!--or , all too late ,
' reproach and want shall be the lot
and you holding his pile upon four ?
some word whose worth my love 's devoir might pay
but in the porch the king and herald rest ;
our interest in the master of the storm !
and i 'll sing of the _ men _ of the homeland
with much resemblance of the past
not all was for thy learning
it was his full intent :
or up the chimney - place ! or if i choose ,
to congress hall repair .
hyrcanian kings and indian princes kneel ,
their homesteads . the enemy led out with them from
all fluidly distilling .
of richard held the wicked prince in leash .
whose sweet words take the hearts of all ,
where is your sagacity ?
isti abjecerunt scilicet ; illa dedit .
and he asked : " is this a statue ,
_ non idoneus _ is willis , _ minus et sufficiens _ ,
and wither and waken and , wild with delight ,
down went the royal george ,
who hath not learned his lesson , and who stands
for it 's heducation we wants , that 's all ,
on this foundation fame 's high temple stands ;
they mingle gloom and splendour , as i 've oft ,
made race with us , but lagged behind at last .
" you stupid barleymow , " said dunghill ;
arachne , when her foe lets flye
( will no kind power the helpless stripling shield ? )
day after day behold me plying
if , when she wake , it be awhile for grief ,
pandare answerde , and seyde thus , that he
and red stars are waxen white ,
o long sweet days--
couched on the verdant herbage of the grove ;
when pacing , as we now this town ,
has its recompense .   so from delight to delight
" consili virtus , summis de rebus habebant
to take his child ; but back the infant shrank ,
just for a little while let it be !
this groundless charge has ne’er been heard ,
so that his visage reddened at the slight :
as to the young spring bounds the passionate south ,
oyeron tus calladas celosías ,
hungry was the air around them ,
" what do you think of a -- hic - cup!--physician ? "
ancient as time . no balm of gentle showers
wells of her eyes reflected stars ...
the cold , cold earth doth shake him ;
reigning over myself and you .
from whose breast came it ? surely ye can guess
column - like and old ,
how the daisies stared ....
our puling wives do open lay ;
play but soft airs , sing but sweet - tempered songs ?
whence i : " thou peradventure marvellest ,
lead us through scythian deserts , lead us where
such let the soul of cruel daphnis be--
unless , perhaps , white death had kissed me there ,
of treasures rare , of joys that thrill ,
the troop of horse have gained the height
but little careth he ,
my sister lamps that o'er the zodiac 's scroll
happen tha'll love me long after i 'm goan ;
and her free tresses to our sunshine cast ,
a peerless bow i too have brought .
( fatal years ! )
finds comfort in himself and in his cause ,
this last gay vision and the scene
a gift to make _ ioue _ proud , or silence bost .
at that loud noise , the sea was seen to swell ,
happy in ruin ! undivorced by death !
that doubtful old man of th ' abruzzi .
a lustre came , too bright to bear ,
no voice i hear from lips death - pale and chill ,
whose very arts are love incarnadine ? "
immortalized ; so here you have his portrait , with the cap in his
i lost my head , or you your heart .
i see the beauty of his providence
stamped on the smoke - scorched skin .
strong hearts are fierce to see
let us always be merry thro ' life ,
we will speak his name in a softened voice ,
the experiment . bring corn , and see if i refuse it . "
speeding along through the rain and the dark ,
he knows not right from wrong , each sense
the text [ footnote : the three last verses of matthew xi . ] was one
( much in vogue since your eagles are gone out of use)--
thou mad’st me that i trow ;
i may not go , i may not go ,
the tale that proved his love so well ,
progress of the cloud , welcomed as it passes along by the joy of
mona machree ! och , the sootherin ' flow of it ,
and she ? she answers , clinging close and trembling yet : " i will . "
credentials was stolen from him .
vs to our own lives ' funerall .
“ in parætonium ; mareotis ' fields ;
so that vultures may be fed
seek thou the monk of st . mary 's aisle .
" we 're fresh from off the ship an ' ' e 's maybe give the slip ,
sit chatt'rin ' upo ' the house - head .
like buttons made of pearl with glints of green .
but good rinaldo mars his promised pleasure .
so spake i ; and when he had onward mov'd ,
oh , what 'll she do in heaven ?
a fiery pillar , beaconing on the sea ;
wherefore looks he o'er the waters , leaning forward
inuidie culpa magis est attrita dolore ,
the dream - flow'rs of hope and of freedom , perchance ,
had pierced their simple bosoms thorow
as harbinger of heaven , the way to show ,
now shew thy progeny ; if not to stand ,
the cricket - field , the quad ,
and swore he should stay , lock'd up till doomsday ,
died on the night , and all was still again , --
now d. now i. now l. figur'd i ' th ' air .
or the night sadden ,
up a dark cathedral aisle :
and knit , with beams and knees of strength , a bed
soft , gentle , sweet ;
of awe - mazed house shall open not . "
orion dashed us on the shoals , the prey
sat and fanned himself serenely
are more than men , )
of social warfare ; hence torquatus stern ,
but fly the boundary of the senses -- live
the one soon lost the smile which childhood wears ,
and brave prince william show'd his lamp - black face :
borne through bright gates of birth
( here , to the astonishment of all her backers ,
as war - parties , when retreating ,
shot , poor lad , so bold and young ,
our d----d good , pleasant , gentlemanly church ,
as there like indra ’s self he shone ,
rascals -- the mushrooms of a day ,
across my funeral - stone .
they love themselves , a third time , in their race .
" at home -- after sunset until the night ends . "
the curtain of my sleep , and one cries out :
the gathering ocean - storm .
back whirl the waves with louder sound ;
she turned her to the right about ,
bashfully she turned her head ; then
i mourn no gilead fair ,
men and women , like new - hatched spiders ,
i 'll dazzle th ' chamber - maids ;
the dead , acasto , are but empty names
to see his children leading evermore
i who see it with delight ,
and he spoke the words which follow ,
there at our faithful table every day ,
sent to cheer us , and kindly endear us
rome , senate , people , all the world have seen
and our friendship last long as love doth last and stronger
my glory and my realm defaced ,
that joy which so divinely yearns !
smote him into the midriff with a stone
carried his sack behind the host .
evening falling on tintagel ,
have bruised mine angel to her piteous death . "
and , if i well forebode ,
radiant with gems upon his throne of gold
it needs romance , my lady fair ,
mine eyes upon her beaming eyes , that stood
her mantle o ' the velvet fyne ;
and though these lines should only line portmanteaus ,
as the fleece that heaven flings
take pity on a sodger . "
and the virtue that gently rises thence
but she neither saw nor heard ;
involves the combatants , each claiming truth ,
as he weak and wounded lies ?
but long ere our approaching heard within
" their silver scales are glestrin ' breet ,
like cloods ov locusts in they hale ,
solemn custom among the greeks , of bewailing annually their first
close , close they stand , swooning and dim ;
them , but when they reached troy they fell upon the pyre till the
the health of jufvrouw kurler , and the news :
" not to me -- for i am waiting ,
thy unprophetic birth ,
those anthologists have husky appetites !
prec .   thank me by following it .
was our outrage sore ? but the worst we spared ,
drives the sharp rock ; the solid beams give way ,
dreamer , say , will you dream for me
the memory of dreadful things
from all the mother - hearts of all the world .
the gate set open , and the passage free ;
pressing my face against the streaming pane .
_ scholar _ . forgive my keeping you with many questions ,
borne in her chariot by her peacocks bright ;
even now do many people ,
tremble with the same delight -
what could we do
gaebe . ein mensch , der nur lieset um zu druecken , lieset
too faithful to forget .
and products , grain and wool !
gluts every food alike in every moon .
o mary ! i had known thee long ,
the ancient hush of soft and tender speech .
' three score and ten .
a temple once to bacchus rose ,
to see what my black hen doth lay .
or in the arena builds the academe ?
yet sabæ 's lords before this babe unfold
eat the laplander for dinner ,
with sleep . then the goddess shed grace and beauty over her that
made young with joy , grown brother - hearted with the vast ,
she girds me in my sailor 's coat
in fordoun 's green embow'ring glade ,
and ills and aches , and teethings , lyings - in ,
but the loud deeps demand me back again .
_ see , dearest mother , the letter says pete will soon be better . _
at first thy little being came ;
till the firm floor creaks and trembles .
brown is my love , but graceful :
of that fair evening had been so ill spent ,
or from the heart of him who sings
down along mountain - glades , when it surges to kindle a woodland ;
suspect i may , yet not directly tell ;
or the unknown builder of that wondrous fane ,
beyond the tilt - yard spread the larger space ,
rolling weights forward by main force of chest .
above or around ;
to win by stealth so pure a sight :
glass with a feeble pride , noting the gray sparseness
song once sung to adam 's ears
of burial , seem to smile up straight and pale
and maketh him her home ,
the sopping bunks , the floating chests , the wet ,
which led my foolish steps to love 's abode ,
still i 'm doom'd to sigh for thee ,
descended , adam to the bowre where eve
suffer this mother 's kiss ,
an autumn evening in a golden year ,
for fear his strange cook
for ye have suffer'd in my quarrel much ,
wyth your set busshes curlynge as men of inde .
and the lips that used to greet them ,
the engines plied their task , once more ,
¿ a qué este amor intenso ?
became not ; and my guide address'd him thus :
with scented oil a soft light shed.(825 )
to - day i hold her very hand ,
the day prescribed was near and they
an orient pearle hung in an indians eare ,
discharge of those stones , which often moved under my feet
" the spirit of man never dies :
on the sand the waves spread boldly ,
aunt , however , scorns to speak any tongue but italian :
.        .        .        .        .
yet in his death this cut - throat wild
instead of in caverns and trees ! "
his body 's resting - place of old ,
eyre 's acquittal 2 v.
audience august with law .
at least , not properly .
in eternal solitude
a - jumpin ' an ' a - throwin ' nuts at me ?
bring the singer , bring the nester ;
" oh , how funny it seems to one not fond of dancing ,
swell’d with false hopes , with mad ambition vain ;
till your good friend the doctor died .
the oaths of his irish that surged when they stood
and frequent pauses take ;
shall sink on envy of the humblest flower .
they will tenderly treasure the tears that we weep
as leisure serves me and the topic warms
my puny gage of scorn and desolate hate
but still he reached the bower of his bride ,
and a voice beside him echoed ,
of gods and men , seeing my life more calm
thy deadly foeman i had reason due .
o'er the dewy - bending flowers ,
i leaned upon a broad and manly breast ,
whose lore is but a thing of yesterday ;
to stand within the vortex
the fair and lovely charming clyde .
he knows he will never again
for the knight to her was dear .
round among the quiet graves ,
within the glimmering square of window - light ,
yellow with time it is ,
feeling , in the rude caress ,
heads and arms were smitten off
the same weird , mocking face to balk and blast,--
of the world 's roads i am weary--
till even the coward spurns his fears ,
the rich , the poor , the high , the low ,
for in the spirit - world sublime ,
and tall , and strong , and swift of foot were they ,
her grief and woe she cast aside ,
for i know it is good to get back to the earth
there was an old person whose habits ,
vaśishṭha said : “ o charioteer ,
my might shall chase thy grief and tears ,
and mulligan 's party , with ardour intense ,
hears in an embarrassed way
sail - spotted , blue and lake - like , sleeps the sound .
since i behold squire satan here again !
but she , who , wise as she was fair ,
o'er the meadows and the mountains ,
ffair pledges of a fruitful tree ,
then wearies of their sweets , and goes his way ,
a new - born wind tosses their tassels brown ,
mother of god , defend us !
and crispy frosts the wild grass hold .
“ ye powers , if those who guilt confess are heard ,
neither age , nor misery ,      nor the menace of death ,
t tried for it .
or why do i live to cry , wae 's me ?
supreme in might , sublime in majesty .
for that strange light beyond our light ,
t ' instruct me of its state .   " ' twixt either shore
superillustrans claritate tua
when , with a young maid by his side ,
all pour'd themselves abroad . as when thick snow
the felloes were of gold , and fitted round
_ and they spat upon him . _
few sorrows hath she of her own .
except for love 's sake only .   do not say
burnt out by popular lightnings ? hast thou four
cross - legged conjurers on mats
follow me .   and he left all , rose up , and followed him .   st . luke
' e 's a - trying to raise the price !
been lighten'd , that scarce aught the sense of toil
when compared with gold and silver . "
while she , with half - breathed jests that , sobbing , fail ,
recalled the white thalassian from the foam .
so beautiful , so fleeting , to the muse .
we shall be equal with those who went seven thousand years ago .
" talk of odd fellows and eccentric characters , "
prayer is the secret , to myself i said ,
‘ hys wyfe and chyldren thre . ’
till a ' the seas gang dry :
their quivering lances from the hissing wound .
turns to the county , after greetings due ,
were summoned by her high command
and who would grieve and fret , if , welcome come
and he spoke the words which follow :
assailed the mill - doors ,
and thither came dame gunda hetta ,
whose grovelling eyes could first adore ,
the meed of all his toils , that hope destroy'd .
o mortal men ! be wary how ye judge :
still with yearning ever turning
{ * * } this was a very ancient building , in the very first style of
subject of immortality .
some other lovers might beguile
then , through the nostrils of the dead she pour'd
there danger calls , and there the combat bleeds ;
with broken shells and sea - weed strown ,
daylight gone .
this northern ghote of sin ;
with whom the son of the chief lies on his back ,
perhaps may amuse , yet they never can move :
to bring astraea from the skies ;
how all these shores are spread with squadrons brave
but if he read aright each line ,
or upon your ear a buffet . "
a hero that the shocks of chance might strike ,
but let not all that wealth of loss be wasted :
and every added weight of woe
senseless trees they can not hear thee ,
that shrouds the cavern , and obscures the sight ,
  old form of " talons . "
and like that vine the girl of whom i spoke
th ' incessant roar of headlong tumbling floods--
thy posterity shall sway ;
a doom so vile , such prodigies as these ,
that she very soon went back to dorking .
upon the child , and bere him oute ,
against wild tempest weaponing .
arrived the last of all the victor host .
at the english court , is the amount of millot 's information
along upon that cross , and robert guiscard .
if he indeed my onset will await .
with his strong shoulders to afford us aid . '
_ hearken , murāri , saith vidyāpati : _
this hope affords fair bradamant content :
to deem that it shall lightly pass away ,
and joy so pure , so mighty , so eternal ,
the tempting beauties of this spacious ball :
naught reck i , if my purpose be taken well or ill ,
of lotus flower and filament .
in armys walloyng fast .
high spouts the wounded monster from his mouth ;
the beggar 's life , with far nirvana gleaming :
then the serpent 's guileful hate
and thou , young genius , with the brows of gloom ,
before the dark that will be coming hides him .
adieu , sirocco , sun , and sweat !
sicken again for the shouts and the slaughters .
advancing then towards the tottering hall ,
to make the platter clean ?
then lydia , far - fam'd lydia ,
he freed by virtue 's strong restraint ,
low mourned the oread round the arcadian hills ;
" ne shall his sister , ne thy father , die ;
  the orations of tully against m. antony were styled by him
rahab kissed me-- !   lo , there fell
nay , ivy , nay , etc .
his name was free from stain or shameful blot
liquit ovans laqueum , quo periturus erat ;
the cliffs amid ,
and many a noonday woodland wandering .
there 's wine from the royal pope ,
of virtue fond , that kindles at her charms .
it descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs .
to try with your slate to find something to say .
" for you not only her i would assail ,
the sea below me glittered wide ,
that 's the true pathos and sublime
some one lives in yonder cottage ,
but the pope 's heart within him burned ,
misfortune , for boldly do i declare that this farewell is in
' i will go back a little to my lord ,
παραλιγωρουμενον . μη ποτε ηδε τουτο και αναγκαιουσιν , το τας μεν
these the words the hero uttered :
" old woman , up yonder , plucking your geese ,
the seven twin - mountains tremble at the sound :
you two have seen the secret together ,
hushed and dreamy lay the house of dying ,
mounts higher , than this sight of mine can mount . "
from the other side raised an uproar when they saw her . agelaus
and another speeds beyond you ,
and all the neighbourhood could tell
“ i sall do nowt o’t ’ sort , ” says deeath ,
she can dress her eyes in love ,
bloomed fables - flowers on furze ,
come , play me that simple air again ,
straight through the cloud of death , where men are free .
prithee a little talk , for ease ,
it was a tempting ickle sing !
brass vessels oft asunder burst , and clothes
in my very unfortunate case ;
the heart 's long - perished happiness .
full , full is life in hidden places ,
where now he sits at the right hand of bliss .
let them drink while the drops are of gold ,
i 'd have sent my armies forth ,
prepare a feast . then with chariot and horses he went to
and yet self - known , were happiness for us .
o'er the still mouth and break its silent thrall ,
" and pure and dazzling as he is
until it became a kingdom 's curse with thee--
of a foster , who , dully prophetic of ill ,
as fer his paper writ
where the brown children all the day ,
better fate have prince and swallow--
damn jokes then , and unmannerly suggestions ,
at the junction of three rivers ,
he is enlumind with that goodly light ,
and upward follow fame 's immortal spring.--wakefield .
is value 's measure in the heart of rich
why cloud'st thou thus thy beams ?
ille etiam abrepta desertus coniuge achilles
and in winter , nelly brown , when the nichts were lang an ' drear ,
everybody is holding his breath--
they preach how sweet those houri brides will be ,
in such an ecstasy !
“ we present bosilka for its odour :
but he 's pretty good at that .
the rare old lace and the subtle scents ,
of pirates false , oran they left with speed ,
of the rural lords and thanes
one moment on the brow , the while she cried ,
to keep the tears out of her eyes .
it blow but that you saw the trees in motion .
togedre as thei ben pleiefieres ,
by thy mercy i beseech thee ,
a worthi world , a noble , a riche ,
dread thou to speak presumptuous doom
laugh and be merry together , like brothers akin ,
among the wise without a peer .
a man ? it may not , may not be ;
headed by advancing steeds ,
expelled by báli ’s cruel hate
they spread the silk upon the earth ,
dulce alumno de palas ,
( dawn is aglow in the light of the iron ... )
were blue and downcast , and methought large tears ,
speak truly , and each word of thine
" all men revered him , and all women loved;"[e]--
--"_my place is wi ' the hosts o ' god , _
then the chapel bell goes tolling--
in the field of tombs , by the via renowned ,
meanwhile the forest was astir , birds sang their gay good - morrows
the mighty bush with iron rails
to the rhythm of its serious instrument .
then breathe no vow with your lips , dear one ;
she looked on , and her looks went everywhere .
llwytcwn llwyth llithiwyd am honno ,
your proper standing as a foe ,
say , that for him all things now are come to pass , even as
with help of buiks and bellis .
allow my head , that rings and echoes still
hath slain , to burn them , and to sooth by pray'r
sits in immensity .
seem flattery , and offend her:--
" the times have changed , " her merry husband roared .
with self - respect , or feel at home
and check at times thy loud uproarious mirth .
ll . 975 - 6 _ & i an - endeȝ þe on his syde
welcome to this my college , and though late , ii . 129 .
laid the metals in the furnace ,
of the priest 's pale hand , upraised to bless ,
blending divine delight with loveliest desire .
and the children are pulling
and long he travers'd to and fro , to acquaint
is thine own sloth -- thy grief belongs to god .
to the caves in the billow he rides his foamed steed :
for these names and dates i am indebted to the courtesy
till bye ha'moss , syne up the castlehill
of ills innum'rous , tuneful goddess , sing !
like riders in haste , and who can not wait .
that sleeps in sin ! harrow the inmost heart
or we can be rich in a common share
" kind god ! " was the last he said .
the children of captivity sat down ,
clasped to a mother 's breast ?
never brings the gallery down ,
for where he comth he can noght ende ,
of friendship or of love .
am trublit now with great sickness
thus as he spoke , he led them in , and plac'd
she sought a low and shadow - hidden door ,
generally the inner accent falls on the sixth syllable
would hold remembrance of chivalry .
the men an ' the ' orses what makes up the forces
heav'n , as thou knowest , i have power to shut
ten columns pass before you to the fight . "
how often . hark , god in heaven , ye know that voice .
lustrous and tender eye--
the rising world of waters dark and deep ,
no ; guided by our country 's laws ,
that brood in grassy nest ,
had now a treasure beyond price ,
‘ whether all that has been said upon this subject be held as
left lingering on his inward ear
of windless august nights , perfect and still ,
my finest thought and courage when i may ,
the road winds white among ashen hills
within three suns , and rise again the other
do n't you note my altered step ?
a ray of sunlight pierced the leaves to shine
chirping round my winter fire ,
old satan -- oh no -- take it some other way--
' t is a sad thing , i can not choose but say ,
_ the snow in the street and the wind on the door . _
it ne'er displays the vain desire
nor do i judge if it shall win or fail ;
and the rusty sword , and he sniffs aboard the moke of the horse
cities of men on the sounding ocean .
whilst i am scarce a toast ?
the obedient angel hears the high command ,
o vanity of vanities !
thy brother folks from thee .
' so he spake , and my heart and lordly soul again were
in the hid place , being crazed by love .
in dealing forth these bashful jealousies :
that too strait seems my mind my mind to hold ,
even as summer my young days go over ,
poor polly 's dying struck him queer ,
“ fflorent and floridas with fyve
as soft the rolling planets shine--
soon , soon , thou shalt have thy kingdom ,
there was another looming
best lay the rhyme , best lead the dance ,
of old was sung by me .
so that on each event if we reflect ,
perhaps the victory shall not come to me ,
it winds a little here and there--
and yellow buttercups , and growing grass
though long we 've missed the sight of her ,
and tell them the sweetness
jamie , come try me
and then , in fancy , faring with the flock
of the immortal flower that will unfold
nec non imbrifero ventus anhelitu
when thus the massy shield magnificent
if all , that hitherto is told of her ,
" _ ayah ! _ " cried the mother , clasping her darling tighter as by
a young beech tree on the edge of the forest
tryin ' to go to heaben on a railroad chyar .
pallas , who with disdain and grief had view'd
how beautiful the clouds ,
and king olaf heard the cry ,
and each one sleeps alone .
schooling its half - fledg'd little ones to brush
more fearful than the soldier , when between
is tached oþ{er } tyȝed þy ly{m}meȝ by - twyste ,
who casually sat in a doorway ;
too comic for the serious things they are ,
sweet , when the great sea 's water is stirred to his depths
here one man 's hand lean'd on another 's head ,
i covered him up till he grew quite hot ,
some of her blood still pure and red remain'd ,
hum love - tunes all the livelong day ,
i turn apostate to the strict command
and she cried : " o sigurd , sigurd , now hearken while i swear
master of requests .   then he instructed a young nobleman that the
and up the dewy mountain - tracks they fared
first from the ancient world those giants came
' let go the cross'--gertrude runshon .
when in the green and leafy shade
then molly said , " i 'll go with you ,
but tell me : and if too secure i loose
and onward move embattelld ; when behold
the distant ocean with despairing eye ,
the glory flashing ' neath yon dome ,
with solid gates affording egress thence
so ceaselessly shall shine ,
the kings of earth shall tremble when they see
or drugs of power the fever 's rage to bound ,
and i to him : " if possible , i should wish
with holy oil and incense blent .
an the sun i ' the lift ;
so burn'd the peaceful oriflame , and slack'd
and so , when some plain irks , or some steep hill ,
they , with their little snow - white tails behind ,
falls with more cadenced resonance ;
" 'cause no plums are in the pie ! "
familiar names shall take an accent strange ,
a couple to your temple bears .
that breaks the coast "
your lips -- and high passions complete me ...
the charms of _ colours _ flowing from goupee .
are bowed at an idol polluted with blood ;
an ' ferlie at the folk in lon'on .
and tulips , and roses .
down~ they knelid on~ her knee :
a giddy fear was on him ; he was reeling .
rushes , and bends them to its own strong will .
alas !   apollo , it must be confessed
o sion ! but the trump and cornet bray ;
nearer one whit your own sublime
flowed from the spiritual lily that she held .
er war dir doch voran an heldenkraft .
his separation from his rose
wherewith to chear him in the winter time .
with coins of scholars ' fancy , which , being rung
leaving the practice of so great an office ,
of hooves resistless , pounding -- a cry ,
as farther on the river runs ,
and into wrinkles , oft the forehead fold ,
the hangman wind that tortures temper and light -
desert the ships , and pour upon the plain .
until at length with perfect form ' tis crowned ;
straightway from his heart departed
and voices fill the woodland side .
but more apart , with less impetuous zeal ,
embassadors like _ turks _ hence send express ,
behind the barracks , walking right into the rising sun .
had he not drank them up for you .
and in what structure the primordial germs
but if the immortal gods do ever mingle
behold her , single in the field ,
so tranquilly declining ;
_ filius e feretro matri redditur . _ luc . vii . 15 .
the minstrels ceased to sound .
now no tear her wasted cheek bedews ,
the blush of cherries when a lawn 's cast over .
was that zeus of the far - borne voice devised a hateful
shield his life , and guard his honour ,
another 's force , so love excludeth love :
without a bubble warning you
when , as my roving eyes grew fixed
if ' e leads us straight again-
upon this heart that loves and hates you both !
fling wide the dauntless banner
oh , swiftly bounds our gallant bark
about the hive would shrilly go
what enter'd into thee ,
that stir this land to strife--
when viola was restored , she began to ask for nino .
of white , with red and yellow bands ,
after a month of daily call ,
and hung the glutinated portals on .
a little shallop , floating there hard by ,
like the rush of stormy ocean
and davy jones ' locker is full
" we must go back , " said the old man ,
with equal eyes beholds the wrongs i bear .
dead dreams , dead hopes , dead loves , and dead desires .
think : the shadow on the dial
the moon was now , from heaven 's steep ,
move softly in .
the hero with exulting breast
there were three young maids of lee ;
and weathers every sky .
when the frigate set her courses , all a - shimmer in the haze ,
with me in dreadful harmony they join ,
idle , ill - mannered , dissipated , dirty ,
came to her : without hope of change ,
lingers all about her .
still on his name she call'd with swooning sighs ,
as you are at one - year - old ?
and to mankinde unprofitable :
of random mischief vent he still his spite . "
of knowledge past or present , could have feared
sche preide unto the goddes so ,
then strengthen me before that time befall ,
and i can almost touch its sails
and break the ground , gain place upon the stands .
she joined the company of those
as the singer 's song out - circled ,
on which the grey - haired barons stood ,
nor have a noose about his neck ,
the cricket tells straight on his simple thought --
long - lost ulysses nigh , down fell his ears
about a meter -- edge to edge--
prophetic eyes discern the shame
and lo , what elfin cities are these we come upon !
try as i like to find the way ,
quam bonus te quaerentibus ,
with spray and surge and splash appeared :
e'en now the vanquished of pharsalia 's field
happy the man , of mortals happiest he ,
hae ye been in the north , bonnie lassie ,
old gardens with old - fashioned flowers aflame ,
there must be such a nervous race ,
a hundred thousand of that chivalry
what joy the prospect yields !
to keep it all unseen from mortal eyes ,
for bees of sense thy arts evade ,
soft drip of clouds about rank fern - forests ,
whom you will , and leave this your present home . ' this is what
barefoot on the earthly husk
but when the music paused , he ceased to shed
and trunks , face downward in the sucking mud ,
wild raves the wind , the arrowy light'nings flash ,
and proved that men of station must
hast thou not heard him speaking oft and oft ,
stille sind die frohen lieder ,
that beat swift music on the frozen ground -
by bards and singers lauded to the sky .
the faery forest glimmered
the earth to them was as a rolling bark
and military school cadets ,
many there were who made great haste and sold
in einem kühlen grunde
" loos'd from hell 's confines , civil discord shook
when inwardly thy spirit was asleep
his brother - chief , whose useless arms lay round ,
desirous , all in circles as they stood ,
for whom thou the true hast forsaken !
grinned at the hammers that we made ;
and i sha n't get home to - night . "
' tripoded ' ' i m , i think they said .
and on the topmost bough ,
like sweet thoughts in a dream ;
accompanies his own song . _ ]
how can i ever cross the sea of longing ?
excursion " , in " some imagist poets " . i here record my thanks .
" if ye are shades whom god deigns not on high ,
to arms , to arms ! each one , etc .
' why do not words , and kiss , and solemn pledge ,
with accents blythe as voice of may
in the roll of battles won ;
yet mind me -- if , through want of grace ,
and binding with briars my joys and desires .
it borders upon swat !
your lovesome labours lay away ,
for even now the load down there weighs on me . "
at length the point of our descent we reach'd
and taught to conquer , or to fall in fight :
" hearken !   hearken !   the voice of god ! "
which country people call a bee .
nay , further , i will make ' t appear
with such wild noises , that the king
no line or compass traced its plan ;
his rifle madly swinging ,
him bursting in to find her standing here
have searched each valley , cave , and dell ,
with ruffles winding down !
their fragments on the cumber'd grass .
nay , even the yirth itsel ' does cry ,
let 's see !   what 's the thing to do ?
and so , being young and dipt in folly ,
more soft , more amiable , as if inform'd
but left their chattering jaws the power to ' plain .
to that small village still called ambleside .
no help , no god ! but lonely pain alone ;
i have planted shrubbery
changin ' pickets in our ' ead .
and we have built our homes upon
an ' when the eastern blink grows wide ,
and juno answered , " dread son of saturn , why should you say this
of him who shoots the thunder flame ,
i knew thee apt to pity , brave to endure ,
e'en as all numbers ray from unity ;
sacri , quos petimus , thalami . pernicius omnes
he saw the mellow light of eventide
while the low sound went on of broken water
but the troopers gave what they had to give
taed , toad ( used affectionately or otherwise of a person ) .
kalervo was called by others ,
the rich man , who denies it , proudly feigns ;
the wizard lights and demon play
and honeybees had lost their stings ,
prove they their power to prance
by the thaumaturgists plundered ,
the screffe commandyd a yeman that stod hem bey
one wild star . kiss me good - night ;
with side * long beard , and locks down hanging loast * * ,
stirs the wavy coverlet
her pride , a raging hector of the hour ,
fair hands around to make myself a garland . to please me at the
as never swelled on poet 's rhyme ,
he has only left us laughing--
_ coelestin _ . who art thou , and what wouldst thou here ? speak !
tibris and castor , both of lycian kind .
the creed and my letters our old bard taught me ;
think how the cowardly bull - runners ran !
they killed little paddy , but spared the young baby ,
he has grown up and gone away ,
all earth can take or heaven can give .
ardua commisi falsae conubia cerae .
lxii . " sheer o'er the highest roof - top to the sky ,
if i al night wolde him in sorwe see
gone deeper than all plummets sound ,
--_black is the night and cold_.--
rachel - like , amid her dead .
will seek to know the reason why
what can be done ? where every one is poor
aye , ' tis a curious fancy--
no one but the pine trees and the white birch knew .
since , with so many against one to ride ,
tore his black beard in his anger ,
the turtle on yon ' withered bough
" i beg your pardon -- pray forgive me if i seem too bold ,
through many regions , and at length her seat
the mind is riveted , the gaze is spent
when autumn cooling caverns seeks ,
where reason yet dreams unawakt , & throu ' the solemn day
can not that champion hate ; because above
executed .
scuffled ,
the echo of a song .
and he answered , " oh ! as i came tripping ,
it well repaid me for my honey ;
our two glad souls are they ,
chinese prosody distinguishes between two tones , a " flat " and a
for the heaven that smiles above me
pink and crimson roses and carnations took your breath--
in the annals of lancaster ,
the radiance of the morning , and now stood
that hornets and mad dogs may boast as much .
and keep my house , as one that doth lament .
and bramble - berries ,
i haf a tresor i{n } my telde of tow my fayre deȝt{er } ,
pours shot and shell into the tyrants ' backs--
i blunder down the dusk of years .
suspende ex humeris , sint aurea tela , sagittae ,
a falling star so glideth down from heaven .
reins round his horse , and urges all his speed ;
vhen he roon like a greyhound she skompered in a race ;
astound rogero fell , on earth reversed ,
nor would consent that lady to forego ,
and hillocks that the mole was heaving .
warse , worse .
latest pound ,
she passed the salley gardens with little snow - white feet .
of the wet of woods , of the lapping of waves ,
the morning star pales in the sky--
oh thou who livest , call , then answer dying me .
go , then , where only bliss sincere is known !
how fast the time goes !
that wise odysseus should return to his own home , let us
i sit above the meadow in the glowing fall
still dusty labor to the passing brave
would reach the pathless darkness through ,
the great adventurers reached it when they brake
nobler , handsomer she thought him ,
for thrang scarce could they flie ,
as the more light such damage he accounts .
john grumlie 's wife cam hame at e'en ,
the wretch appeared amid all these to say :
all time for something yet unseen ,
this side of supper
that they have hid my father 's face .
( to make their pray of pesants yet dispise )
but to go to school in a summer morn,--
oh , ever may the power which led
where he met his long - lost sister ;
ære ciere viros , martemque accendere cantu . _
with unseen wound .
by the harsh word ’s agency .
seeing jove also on the topmost point
though to the soul 's deep tocsin nature joins
set therein , and she poured wine into a goat - skin bottle ,
the sweetest way to home . "
so , when a dry spring and clear space is given ,
" this heathen seems much a heretic ;
as safe as heaven kept the guarded grail--
he threats to burn arontes ' forteress ,
my science - friend , my noblest woman - friend ,
upon my kindling fancy swarm ,
" soldier , soldier come from the wars ,
rise , o youth , and wrestle with me ! "
health to their toils -- thus may they still go on--
eloped with pat . magan , esquire .
to make way before her . / the huns did wrathful grow ,
distant lands,--but all woven by the greek genius into the
spread wide , and other trees that downward grow.--steevens . ]
in deathly slumber , simulating clay ,
and guests without end were invited there ,
where not a torrent murmurs heard by thee .
on her shining hair and face .
if one could merely comprehend the plot .
and curse the ruffian 's aim , and mourn thy hapless fate .
blood - red ruby - stones of daring ,
then hey , for a lass , & c.
to troie , and come upon this thing
i miss the old heart in myself .
nor knew the fortune of achilles ’ friend ;
they can only shriek , shriek ,
“ severe atonements ? whether slow disease ,
and the o. c. said :   " you are guilty " , and i said never a word ;
neither road . the shady quiet
from books degraded , there i sat at ease ,
not be utterly overwhelmed with grief ; but the son of tydeus
wishing to own two thousand acres ,
with airy step he hastes the pastures through ,
had what she would : and now made war ,
come out where my gold is , my red gold and pale ,
the bodies of ancient mummies an ' the treasures of ancient kings ,
" upon my handmaidens will i pour out
and i 'll forgive your highland chief ,
here amid the bathroom 's vapour ,
then pray that the shepherd who guideth
the pensive secrecy of desert cell ,
since they have had no choice , you see ,
lempo , stuff his throat and nostrils ,
to make good my promise there and then .
though nursed by such old legends ,
she sees him in his travelling trim ;
or coach it to vienna 's air ;
through the thin verge the pelean weapon glides ,
as by the light of opening day , 249 .
spare us , oh spare us long our heart 's desire !
within the kingly palace builded high ,
and ' twas his thought , that had the goddess learnt
which , be they what they may ,
i will give thee all my corn - fields ,
o lord , thy heavenly grace impart ,
and years vanish like the morning dew .
as naught on earth save daisy dare !
with passions so potent , and fancies so bright ,
is in thy ears to - day !
their tender glances like a screen ,
there was some slight resemblance i suppose ,
by the struggling moonbeam 's misty light
know that for this most gentle maiden 's death
king ( rising in excitement , and forgetting himself . )
blest be the hour of night , vol . vi . , 48 .
and i could see by her bright eyes as well .
now chill november 's breath is cold and keen ,
a name in heaven has bharat won ,
" that a tempest - cleaving swan
every province hath its own ;
the buffaloes batter them down .
such love may be blindness , but where are love 's eyes ?
dear god of mercy , and if lion - like
dundas his name .
manuel phile , de animal . proprietat . sect . i. i. 12 .
me with a heavenly robe of white ! "
beside the salt sea - wave ,
three glittering dragons to the gorget rise ,
the cunning color rarely spread
frightened , the owlets are scattered :
by the shadow of his right hand ;
must sit and stake with quiet breath ,
sprang quickly to his feet once more . his look
teach thou another land to rest
of , and so made _ him _ the best
the only sound that is heard in space
plot not of nights , thy fellows ' peace to blight ,
the worlds of east and west ,
from darkness of the dreadful night ,
what is the flag of england ?   ye have but my sun to dare ,
and make love to it in the master 's place .
their annual bloom renew ,
when i knaw at her heart is at eease ,
" ( there they alike in trembling hope repose )
' tis sweet , as year by year we lose
dear sister , if thou ask but this ,
if , on lawns elysian ,
their lightnings fleet !
the pagans rousèd , by their foes harassed ,
yet soft in touch and sweet in view :
hear now my pray'r ! avenge my hapless son ,
in withered husks of some dead memory .
light in the east and light in the west ,
do you remember how that night drew on ?
the neighbours stared and sighed , yet blessed the lad :
toto illum vitae tempore parturiit .
sumptuous was the feast nokomis
she doted , crazed and aged .
the mass .   a stillness of white faces wrought
" hath gawain failed in any quest of thine ?
i have caught the pike of mana ,
our labour must be to pervert that end ,
blood floated all the pavement . then the cries
aught pleasing prompts her , soon as she is wak'd
thou here hast wrought king etzel such grievous loss and woe . "
a lady from heaven descended , at whose prayers
she should have feasted with
self - love and social coincide , or even become in effect the
scarce knit and now too soon to be untied ;
dug by the hands of stranger men ,
along the shadowy halls i groped my weary way about ,
except the wish that all we love
but if apollo , or if mars the fight
indefinite as the english expression .   it was a mass or lump
for if no song i e'er had wrought ,
and with love shall enfold
beyond all other ; think the same vouchsafed
and why i am weak and worn ,
the knotty fore - stick laid apart ,
by pancho 's band is feared ,
we are our fathers ' sons :   let those who lead us know !
what trust and what fears have they
and some with darts , and some with stones defend .
and the road passes on through the long afternoon
mine eyes fell downward into the clear fountain ,
then not your deeds only o voyagers , o scientists and inventors ,
it thus should happen that , against all right ,
but , after a battle , what gashes and gaping wounds are seen , what
o god , did you know
to each troubled soul that liveth ,
that occasion , they say , that from the immense number of statues
can i forget the hallow'd grove ,
christian at once and cacciaguida ; as were
imbib'd from him the sacred love of truth ;
in silver radiance o'er the time - stained walls ,
i shudder when i stop to think , had i been living then ,
_ tho ' storm and summer shine for long have shed
yes ! side by side , and hand in hand ,
beatrice .   what !   and hast thou deign'd at last
( ll . 333 - 344 ) so the holy men praised the loving - kindness of the
and a thousand happy hearts enjoy
inde caput morbi . raedarum transitus arto
_ rebeckahs _ sonns together born
and the pickel - haubed caesars gave their reasons .
fair - haired and redder than a windy morn ;
from books degraded , there i sat at ease ,
when will he tire of war and strife ? "
have watched the hour - glass of the centuries .
upon their top the feather'd quiristers
what stead our prudence or our wisdom ?
most unwillingly i hurt you
in time 's great periods shall return to naught ;
justice is dying , mercy now is dead .
my tasks , my heart , had much the lighter grown .
so striving each th ' other to undermine ,
' cease thy loud bugle 's clanging knell , '
" gitche manitou , the mighty , " the great spirit throned above ,
by my free will that chose sin ,
and stumbles all over my cauliflower plants ! "
and malinche , now passive with anguish ,
this knotty _ case _ , with leaden _ balls _ ;
straightway , that i may give thee a stranger 's gift ,
with thy suitor , ilmarinen .
and fair fa ' my collier laddie .
suitable translation , but it has been pointed out to me that
the loophole grates where captives weep ,
now were the deeds of heaven - born bacchus fam'd
stretch thy dark sceptre o'er this new domain
coil thyself together tightly ,
swept for a moment grove and wave and sky
to quell the proud rebels -- for valiant is he ;
an ' stain them wi ' the saut , saut tear ;
and high and rough the second showed his face .
the things that have been and shall be no more ,
the four and twenty elders , at the feet
to the feast at pohja holden ,
and felt its tune on her changed lips expire ,
we shall never get in ! ... yet through the standing glass
his upper wede the knight with speed
plunged his hands into the water ,
but alas ! the foot obeys not ;
" three cities are there , dearest to my heart ;
no doubt you have heard the name before--
he whistled , and sang , and laughed , and rolled
him , who was born to gird on him the sword ,
constitutes the ball of the thumb , and draws the point of it
but he strode onward , thinking--"was it false ,
but now he 's big and all that stuff
now , if thou wouldst , when all have given him over ,
where many a danger i must dare ,
she throws a fit of rapture
this grave opinion fix'd at last :
look and see what the letters spell ;
" oh , just traveling , " he answered . " what have you been doing ? "
his horse he pricks with his fine spurs of gold ,
the landlord allowed ( with a smile ) he was proud
the forebodings of wealhtheow were justified .
with trees and bushes hidden here and there ,
my fever'd thoughts will pass away .
let no one in greatness too confident be ,
somewhere at every hour
they shall heed thee as mistress with trembling and awe ,
and over all his rough and writhing boughs
with al myn herte i have withholde ,
as may never be fought again !
then i ’d walk up to the station ,
to find the spring of youth at last ,
perhaps a slice of wedding - cake ,
has yearned with dreams , through long , long , years ,
more than a noisy game ,
here young dione arms her quiver'd loves ,
baptized her infant brow in blood ;
o'er the waste lands lone ,
from the east and west a whirlwind ,
nestle again within my arm .
edifice on sure foundations tied ) ,
not once or twice in our fair island story , 46 .
but in the solemn evening stillness i shall gather flowers , to
where the rose that blooms in her exquisite cheek
a life without pretension .
and bit the ground before me .
as heaviest is to him who most gives way .
with horses and with chariots high upborne ,
but still the seaman - throng through whom he pass'd
here armed with silver bows , in early dawn ,
who would to love make no replies ,
to sum up all , be merry , i advise ;
and beat my little drum ;
haste , haste to make her bed .
with flame and rapture ; drinking to the odd
the famous sepulchral epigrams of simonides deserve a word to
white as the down of angels ' wings .
one that will answer to my mind ;
with the last roses of the year ;
oxford , iii .
which once more ended , " to the wood , " they cried ,
talon and tush and claw .
ceased from sobbing and lamenting ,
there on the lake where space is lone and large ,
to me what the price is
and god is god , my darling ,
if two thousand long years have not made us behave ,
roams hope with that strange longing , like regret ?
shall turn to marble if you die
of wives too free ;
i can talk to the night -- the night!--
the oars laid idle at the last .
that beneath it , where it rides ,
she will die if she should hear ! "
and all along the little street ,
we blanked them with bills through all their bright armor ,
successive , and the timely dew of sleep
but the good god is debonair and holds us by the
and the ripe peach dropped to its seed a - rot ,
i -- who the throng affect not , nor their state--
and o'er the bindweed 's bells the brown bee pass
glory showed forth his wonders upon him , the lord of nations
only the spirit glorifies
" and to the regent of this isle alone
and him by oath they truly honoured .
and a cheer - up hand that he claps upon
all the fragrance of summer when summer was gone .
a soul in her to match thine own ,
it 's nothing to me
" use every man as he deserves ,
" when some years ago he and others had fed
i am the virgin holding lilies ,
beamed the blue day ; and the bountiful year on it
and all the while that i on earth remained ,
our limbs to rest , and on the toil - worn crews
we spied an opening in the ground ,
with vocal heel thrice thundering at my gate ,
there 's a neat little clock ,
" sir , by your leave , i fain would know
you must still be bright and quiet ,
o'er its drown'd banks , forbidding all return !
have turned against you , his terrible battery of the slanders and
the lammermoor , but men may dread
et postquam poenae causam cognouit ab ipsa ,
some humble way to save his self - respect .
let your chambers show no sorrow ,
to the earl then went      an armed warrior ;
we saw her roped with pearls of price , with princes at her call ;
too gross , long time unwont the mail to bear .
in a hieroglyphic ' tis written--'tis spoken in a tongue unknown ;
to save them still , though hector was no more .
in the rash lustihead of my young powers ,
bot natheles to that he herde
_ and knew the fruits love bare _
to stop the current near charybdis main ,
the raggedy man that orphant annie knew ;
and coming to the place , where i abode
i floated with the current of the stream ,
it is gloomy , or glad , as it fits your eye .
industrious _ h----gg----r _ , whose magick brains
into pohjola 's great castle .
into his private office and sit down
if friendship you accept , whate'er kind heaven
and the black darkness of the vault
to sink and settle , but too much to glide
his persian louers all shall leaue him ,
about the comfort of his wife and family ?
and to our age 's drowsy blood
hopped upon the window sill ,
omne quod est nimium viciosum dicitur aurum ,
elate the long procession he surveys :
round his swoln heart the murmurous fury rolls ,
while the sun and thou arise to bless the day .
i can tell of manhood debased by you ,
we plant with the apple tree .
desired food , to it doth make his flight ,
it 's his accommodating memory .
that day by day this flower - room of mine
beetles above the eddying deep--
over the price
queen .   your prayers are granted , my servant , you will be the
leading kine with love .
the simple woodman stands amazed , as if
one little gust will alter your intent
for fear , when i pass by ;
the fishers say those sisters fair
that loosened hair of which thy brow
thus doth the stuff of worlds , moulded by me ,
know when to speak ; for many times it brings
then think i of deep shadows on the grass,--
for i wol take so good hiede ,
outvote the nation 's voice in hapless hour .
spirits dried up and closely furl'd ,
and ask them how they fare .
when he who adores thee has left but the name
when thou shalt pass me with averted eyes ,
untouched , unsoftened be,--
in my opinion , they are quite out of it .
wife , and property , and then i conceived the idea of making a
to us the mystery deepened ,
of generations beat the music down .
thou wrong'st his honour , wound'st his princely name .
hast thou heard the saying of angar ,
--but so it was -- quae genus thought
with the flame that in his bright eye plays--
mansion .
" the owner may have this back again .
and still to - morrow 's wiser than to - day .
no , lollius , no : a soul is yours
luring all their radiance from them
who is it lacks the knowledge ? who are the curs that dare
has met temptation and gained full control .
they wait for us , thousands of miles
follow'd them all .   but if thou know'st and canst ,
one at vienna 's gate ,
i yield him pledges on my side :
patroclus forth ; him under ilium 's walls
when once he answer'd to a friend ,
once on a time
have ye not lain awake the long night through
no cumbered chamber will the master share ,
oilean ajax first the voice obey’d ,
but my love is only
say , was thy little mate unkind ,
with the elegant h -- tt -- n as lovely tho ' darker ,
be eu{er}e worchinge þi wille ,
i may have grown forgetful . oona , take
is traced by now to the fishes ' bounds
in golden sheaves the earth 's abundant treasure .
canto vi -- dyscomfyture
as wholly wasted , wholly vain ,
and surly winter grimly flies ;
state , and her increasing violence alarmed
come , manhattan maiden , share the sailor 's pains .
in me ; me , so to read
ruddy as a mountain - berry ,
come , then , as ever , like the wind at morning !
i said :
if again he returns to his practice of lies ,
three pretty girls were in them then ,
let him who ne’er had brooked defeat ,
in new perfections for more perfect skies ;
passing his prison door ,
thy heart throbs fast and sometimes may grow low ;
he feels the strained timbers giving ' way .
i smiled , and they thought me mad .
he 'll do well for a grunt ,
and ceased , above my intricate house ;
one headlong plunged , pursued by fire and sword ,
tecum , quos dederint annos mihi fila sororum ,
in the lighted house of her father , why should taheia start ?
as orient pearls and rubies are ;
her temples with an olive wreath are crown'd .
and turn again familiar paths to tread ,
when they hear the soldiers come
work out the great designer 's will ; all these ye
but kindled a gleam like the rosy east ,
so through green woodlands in the twilight dim ,
a terrible and splendid trust
that it leads our hearts to rest at last in heaven ,
an enormously genteel flamingo !
constance is gultif , wel i wot . "
the faire nurse still such lullabies ,
she is a woman notable for eyes
and to - night i 'm down in " dixie , "
" as stormy cowls their summits hid . "
in their triumph and their yearning ,
but the workmen fail their master ,
is darkened by the shadow
the cube - red splashes of apples ,
who himself was so free he dared sing for the slave
seeking to find the old familiar faces .
from lawn to lawn , from path to path pursue
in our heart of hearts believing
that may me helpe nor comfort in this ,
and some because their neighbours sold before ,
less quickly from the unstable soul would fade ,
to sit ,
with his forbidden beauty , sees for him ,
to vivian be a part of what you knew
beckon'd his glad assent . free then to act ,
b bit it .
they gather , and gather , and gather ,
have listened to truths which he uttered so well ,
ne lengere doon him after hir to gape ;
in subtle symphony of tone is blending
the curé 's progress
near where their cottage stood .
on the stone within this oat - loaf ,
e'en as its motion of necessity
of mæon , breaking through his mail , breaking his breast withal :
all the wide grove o'erlooking . such his size ,
to call her up as if there ;
the noble scion of ignoble seed ?
how they brought the good news from ghent to aix .
radha , enchantress ! radha , the queen !
and racks your bosom with incessant woe ,
an ' the angel thet writes all our sins in a book
small feet in childish patter ,
bravest , in my account , of all the greeks .
yet , nicolete , why fear'st thou fame ?
never to think or breathe that this round earth
round her heart a motherly patience
place of israelite resort ,
in the vague meshes of some airy net !
lay me in the earth , and make it
yielding , abjur'd his high estate .   forthwith
and with much difficulty push'd the ship
quaking with dread resum'd , " or tuscan spirits
there the mother rocks her infant ,
by a passing breeze . "
is miserable . ' twas even so with this
" i must not be so invaded , "
to the undue praise lavished upon him by his contemporaries .
stretch your strong arm , for ye have power to save !
her careless ringlets , as a mourner 's , flow
in signe of mercy and of grace ,
or poison the meat of a man in bombay ;
now , either lead me to your gallant fleet ,
by closest scrutiny , which way are driv'n
a boat there we took ,
if any labour those big joints could learn ,
for people to get late to service ,
yes , they can make , who fail to find
good - bye !
they would not have gone away
for my sake combat pain and care ,
chatty senior entertained me:--queer fellow -- mr .
weary then he drops to bed .
" what days and what bright years ! ah me !
within my heart broke forth in notes of praise .
of karagwe , uganda and ungoro , stopped ,
that sparkles with a strange intensive light .
better thy unbroke seal , if it would teach
she paws the ' ole night through ,
are doubly fir'd .
russians suffer sad distress
' tis good to keep o'erweening merit down ;
with burdens hard to bear ,
for the sake of simon peter
the reed of the rude shepherd boy !
with ruffled wing and faded breast ,
the acacia trees .
enriched the tables all around ,
behind each dainty ear they wear
como fué la edad moruna ;
the wide pacific waters
and smile upon my pain ;
to see her godlike ráma go ,
quietly as a cloud at break of day
and show a soul within it dwelt !
to draw some clue to his own strange place
god ! how the women 's checks are white ,
thou with thy host this day shalt be
red - rent with hooks of bramble , and all she wore
juicy herbage that grew by the water side . they took the clothes
or would it find a secret lair
though elsewhere trouble might be rife ,
ajax and both the heralds , sage , grave men ,
" ah ! now , though i sit on a rock ,
_ meaning a better penny thence to get . _
these precious , pearly , purling tears
predominates .
than a homing bird loves flight,--
but gently pressed from the soft side
the polished silver of thy glossy breast ,
the achaeans in the matter of her marriage ; while we in
to the night - warbling bird , that now awake
when hedge - pipes they begin to chime ,
and spirit pure from earthly taint ,
flit russetly away .
dull creatures -- how can they inspire her ?
where is deiphobus , and where the might
my burdens have been fitted to the little strength that 's mine ,
broad - flowing axius . in his shoulder stood
rettulit inferias iugurthae .
the snaw is thy skin , and the rose is thy cheek ;
with dilated form and lambent eyes watch'd you .
she rode him through the mire ;
cu{m } ius & i{us}ticivm cora{m } te migrabu{n}t ,
set pains therein and many a grievous thing ,
enemy .
never it hauled her !
the nuts of knowledge harvested .
when yew is out , then birch comes in ,
but by the half ; the eager whale amidships held her place ,
ever upon this stage ,
comes sudden to my soul ; and i must bear
gripes thy cold limbes soe fast , thou canst not fly ,
quoque rependet , erit clavus et hasta sibi .
would she not have the advantage , after all ?
but out - a - door in wind and rain ,
of hanging foliage that perfumed
who guards in her breast
the voice of time , the hush eternal ,
and abode in open water ,
good tidings we tell ,
he culled the many sweets they shaded ,
and a song to wake the dead .
the stranger 's horse , as hard as nails ,
oh ! are ye sleeping , maggie , vol . ii . , 156 .
whose ages are at once display'd---
this , whence to me returneth thy regard ,
how lofty turnus vaunts amidst his train ,
the land was won at awful cost
seen you win ,
the rigid satisfaction , death for death .
fled is young bacchus with his revelry ,
" oh , god , have pity ! " she was dead .
full tale of wonders told , i may not tell ,
then you would n't have looked on it as just a matter
so i again resorted to the lore
before i meet my fate ,
then messengers were forthwith to old king siegmund sent ,
king of arragon , who died in 1285 , leaving four sons , alonzo ,
the kittens on the coat ,
we had loved , as the story says ,
or just act bored to death , when i
this whole day long has been just mine
yet ere he left it , being in a mood ,
adopted his arms , with some distinctive addlition . his scutcheon
where peaceful homes abide ,
si te non totum chloridos herba tenet :
of sacred melody confess'd the force ;
near by and cry upon the ruinous face ,
" from the finest and best of all other men 's powers;-
an ' lossin ' taste noo for the dram ?
and was lying now in ambush
stronger than death , and smiling at the tomb .
give me a kiss , my poet , take thy lyre .
all read their riches backward into loss ,
her sweeping arch , iris the dwelling sought
and found a fair young squire who sat alone ,
trouble to the trojans . in the end , he deemed it best that the
" stay with her one day and sing ! "
he held them up , and in his turn
and looking to see what buds were opening .
than ever was his wo nt .
shrub and bird and beast are mingled
i took a sea - shell in my hand ,
with a " yooi , yooi , yooi , " bill ridden cheered them .
and upon him some charge of robbery lay :
yet not to sorrow 's languid lay
down their flanks , while they impatient pawed desire of the
and my poor mother , too , will claim her boy .
blow the bugle , draw the sword--
we will build us other houses ,
the storm is quite likely to last ;
she thought to thread this web 's fine ravel out ,
them what thou wilt ; " and i began , since he was willing , " so may
alas ! to whom the almighty gave ,
fairer than any waken'd eyes behold .
and his passion boiled and bubbled ,
still let me seek for god amid the dark ,
and mother said , " i am right glad
heigho , says rowley ;
breathed : stirred .
than such , to whom his name was never known .
in druid vapour and make the torches dim ;
beyond the world 's horizon ,
leave death with god .   go forth , i say , and build . '
if things go on in this queer way ,
" where are you going to up so high ? "
fly in dark troops the dazzled imps of night--
made reverent by the spot on which they fall .
now let us have done with a worn - out tale--
and left them to drive and drift
from seven i ' th ' morn until the midnight hour .
" o thou forgotten help , dost thou yet know
than thus in haste a council to convene ,
is just as true 's the deil 's in h -- ll
live , clothed with cursing like a robe of flame ,
no power can quench ; for in the end they conquer
therewith he pass'd , and reaching the sixth pier ,
learn first my name , that even in this land
war had delayed them . they had been drawn away
for had he heard a cry , or but the voice
to bath , she could not show ,
the music of her voice , and for themselves
then up and spoke the plumbyers bold ,
is paradise , though with like gracious dew
pagans are slain , a thousandfold , in crowds ,
aloft in awful state
ye only can engage the servile brood
each gentle wight will deem of good intent .
spirits , though the flesh be by ;
and run forward with such fleetness
yet , ' tis not spring until the cuckoo cries .
earth is not spoilt for a single shower ;
he wrote , and hinted for excuse ,
and winning eyes , o thou most fair ,
light as a bloom upon it , not to pass
i turn'd , but ah ! how trembled in my thought ,
if i should rub an eye ,
grant us a holiday ;
from every dome by pomp superior known ;
in comes four legs ,
so still you haue them shut vp in a fould ,
summer shall flush with poppy - fields in bloom ,
that , while she spake her image all did burn ,
for spendynge of tyme or they a borde
laboureth for naught ; for from her thought
play the game !
and thus he spoke and twisted hands , and twitched ,
a pleasure in the gentle stream that flow'd
i have told you all this , that you my heart may mistake not ,
as full of sunshine to our aged eyes
and one , that is sure to delight you--
and evil - feathered bat - felled wings .
when these sad sights were overpast and gone ,
that when victuals are tepid they 're not very nice .
all i knew was when i needed
to the high dreams we held within .
and through god 's mighty universe ,
what though the crumbling walls turn dust and loam--
with holy care will keep it by vs.
no . i.--a letter from mr . ezekiel biglow of jaalam to the hon .
and the mannerisms that were then deemed of the essence of
o whence came your twining tresses
inwrought with trees of every clime ,
then answered lancelot , the chief of knights :
he ceased , and on the topmost turret sat
and fall in love ?
reaching governo into po he falls .
it rains on the umbrellas here ,
the hand of life he took :
o'er her warm cheek and rising bosom move
o'er the fallow flood at her father 's bidding
beneath that dome of light . bright eyes that looked
towards twenty - second . and a man with jaw
whither , midst falling dew ,
sing his shoulders wide asunder ,
dangerous , who called in question his knowledge of greek , and his
yet with its sweet breath rising on the air
in other happier years .
many stop and ask him why ,
who seeks to sway , must stoop to own
hast ta'en to share thy city and thy cheer ,
for the world wants daily little kindly deeds ;
his hand , that yet remains upon her breast , --
cupid plague thee for thy treason !
with a slow and cloud - like motion ,
then , lady , dread not here deceit
first , hector and ulysses , noble chief ,
of ashtaroth ? or did you love the god of the
now the head - dress brings thee trouble ,
' e smiles , i guess , if ' e 's a lovin' one
there wur flags of all nashuns fra the union jack
how some are kissed , with tender looks ,
sat the lovers and whispered together , beholding the moon rise
a riche feste sche hem made :
bound on his tender thigh the martial blade :
shot flying in horrible squads ;
and thy great grandsire .   well befits , his long
and yet once more say ... no word more !
who gives its lustre to an insect 's wing
at golf no bunker breaks his club ,
our common loss they trust will be their gain ,
and one rose up , a leader of them , lifting a threatening rod .
sumantra fast and faster drove
for a rhyme to ' guelph ' and ' self . '
and sweeps the howling skies .
with the maids of braided tresses . "
to humbler functions , awful power !
him shot to death the minstrel ; down fell he dying there .
" --the parlour - door -- what stirred it ? "
lay the valley , brimmed with wine
what force could he gainst so great might prepare ?
no , nor the groanings of our vanquished brothers .
that is the joy of brighter worlds to be ;
and lest her prayers should hold him from the path
o'er female hearts with chaste seduction reigns ,
wider , and wider till the swells subside
conquests of alexander gave to the civilized world a unity of
the dutchman 's spies that watched his march from every rocky wall
while still is spared the evil thing
yes , the opechee , the robin ,
mingle in the living mass ,
the supreme virtue show'r not over all .
and in his well - built house , when here i came ,
harbinger of the dawn , the breeze of may stirs and smells sweet ,
of generations of men as they thunder along .
lives among the false loves , knowing
that howds her barn to t ' breast .
if i can not carry forests on my back ,
round their necks , old men , women and children ; and as the fairy
and sprightly lustre breathed upon his sight ,
thurgh him which alle thinges may ;
and cruel shares shall earth 's soft bosom tear :
for marks of _ toothache _ i can trace
and go -- you'll catch the train if you speed up . "
so there was an end of one , two , and three ,
then bharat for the road prepared ,
in days of yore , but ( which is very odd )
what to the devil shall i sing or say ? "
brought me here ere i had reached my sixtieth year .
my father 's hand scarce snatching me
ha ! yet with a triumphant shout
chased by the wolves . off the dark firth of forth
it pictures straight the final close .
they live now , like chameleons , upon air
open bright thine eyes at morning
others again with a coat upon their backs
and now , tonight , comes the same sound of rain .
nobly remembered all her children--
and , when he 's eager for a bit of fat ,
a - runnin ' through de grass ,
shriek to the echo , and the low winds moan--
as a sower that scattereth seed ,
but i thrill to behold
and brandish’d round him all his hundred hands :
to piece a coat for patterson to warm himself within,--
conversational language .
to have some time you can call your own .
we drift in dreams together--
and sought to bring on the inhabitants
a crimson rose . we 'd catch the wind and twine
loud sang the string , as the death - hissing shaft
now twilight dims the waters ' flow ,
that this was the mould of their vessel ,
find grandest poetry that e'er was penned ,
a bubble of pale fire it flew
for a time the seasons
cease mocking at me , master ,
that he might loose his daughter . ransom rich
the wild boar from his lair !
that daily asks the draymen all to dine :
i knew that we had suffered each as other ,
clear as a skylark 's mounting song
and ' twixt his nape and shoulder , ere he knew ,
the hare sleeps where it lies ,
ah me ! what a dull day it is !
' till , looking back , they saw the navy move
passing through thy boyish scenes .
e'en his dead corpse to save , and grant his wife ,
then loud and jangling when the typhoon swept across the sea ,
to make a lover , he
in lethe deep our woes we steep -
with their leaves lifted up to shake hands with the breeze
the dark wave is one :
till our iron roads are beaten into ploughshares ,
a little sorrow , a little pleasure ,
took the breath from our sails , and we stay'd .
it is easy to observe that dacier , in this noble similitude , has
then call your neighbors in .
we might carry a royal ransom ;
" hafter thank you kindly , but my diamon ' days is done , "
the vast cathedral - towers in peace look down :
_ 3 kinge . _ welcome , the world 's sure way !
how , boldly , in defiance of commands
for yielding increase . first your stubborn lands
to its inmost depths all glowing ,
from the waters and the marshes
to watch the turf - smoke coiling from the fire ,
a hundred years ago .
like a brute life , sleeps patiently .
a tale that often comes to me ,
for as soon as the dawn approaches
his crown of love .   his wife she soon was made ;
then i was sad , for nothing was left to love .
then to my master turned me round and said :
a beautiful , bright , ruddy glow .
nor son , nor wife , nor limb , nor life ,
with fates averse , against their king 's command ,
and some folks thought it a dream they dreamed
" who buys a baby has to pay
the robin sang love to his shy little sweetheart ;
i heard a voice : it said-"drink , pretty creature , drink ! "
domes
and he spoke the words which follow :
so shut your eyes upturned , and feel my kiss
still girdles round that castle gray ;
a breed of fierce man - slayers , sire and son .
and pour , above , the consecrated stream .
then will i not deny you / to let you longer live .
so , baseball players , if you 're wise ,
let the hope set .   are there not other hopes
where dwelt the fabled race of double form ( 14 ) ;
hiccory , diccory , dock .
have ending .
on the sand - plains , vast and barren .
and modern percies lose their wonted sleep
a hun that liked not treason / had given him to know
wall - flower                            _ fidelity in adversity . _
of souls whose bodies yet endure the chain !
and _ item _ , a god ( but he 's dead ! ) ;
inflamed her reddening eye .
whistle never tuned for thee ;
she drew a quick breath that was almost sobbing
if the rose is blooming on his kalpak . "
--then the full - grown poet stood between the two and
no more , in hall or bow'r ,
ah woe ! this is destruction .
" ' get gold ! get gold ! ' this was the cry .
the poor are poor .
reaping a barren gain ;
" virgin mother , daughter of thine own son , humble and exalted
mors grauis a templis in caua busta trahet ;
most full of sadness from the thought
unnumbered , give their aid : a world complete
he spake , and walking to that aged form ,
has the day o ' judgment come
these hands were made to shake sharp spears and swords ,
masked on with light,--within the range
of thy proud war - steed wade thro ' christian blood ,
" i must think . "
returns to be your dweller once again .
tories call me whig , and whigs a tory ;
our altars high , and sanctuarised sod ! "
forgot the dread renown , the mystic art ,
and the old mastery of life gone ,
but it is fitting , i to thee this while
awhile on hope may fondly lean
and guilty haroun , sullen with mistrust
' annales tanusii scis quam ponderosi sint et quid vocentur , '
in wildwood flowers dimly clad ?
a funeral train .
kabîr says : " it is the spirit of the quest which helps ; i am the
"   of the individual
but , matilda , an angel was near us , meanwhile ,
a - bove they left that gentilman~ ,
archbishop alphege walked the wall
from sparta , it is now the twentieth year ,
ye never again will smile on me ,
qui manent in villis
and god with heavenly food thy life renew ,
contention : but within the revolution of a few months , the same
low before the driving storm ,
when severed so by many a mile--
let no one , mary , name thy name ,
and i should leave this play alone .
he try'd to calm her timid breast . nor yet
the rich and beautiful and dreadful tomb ,
in those fierce battles and those conflicts dread ,
and if ye doubt the tale i tell ,
to them i have devoted , for the sake
wills that i should see his court by a mode wholly out of modern
but where the ship 's huge shadow lay ,
natheless my heart demands in grief
call all the loves to flutter nigh ;
showers soft and steaming ,
" there is the prize thy visions would achieve !
when she saw her children flying from her .
that bites not the johnnie ,
a paraphrase of marryat ,
the holy ghost -- the spirit -- releaseth never
my new love , of good will to me ,
yea hearken to this my counsel , and crave for a battle - steed . "
daintiest of forest flowers
“ so may he conquer ; slaughter , toil , and blood,--
and if he doubted his two sons ,
life was white , but death was darkened ;
but their great sinnes , the causers of their paine ,
he this and more hath learnt ; and i am safe
of winning with his humor , and he went
with pointed beards
" hear ! hear ! hear ! hark to the word i bring !
a dreadful race ! by victor ne'er controll'd ,
the waggon . her mother prepared her a basket of provisions with
save the pale flood , o'erwhelming as it strays .
or could you welcome to this world again
but it 's for jack solomon ,
keep a stiff upper lip like a deacon ;
of the royal elemental days ,
the holiest saints will i invite
the first thing that was understood by me
thou hast thy paphos , and idalium fair ,
which gave us an ancestral hive ,
o goddess ! who wast yesterday a guest
in laughters she wakened ,
to paris for to ride - a.
i bear you company no more .   behold
pardon , a subject for prayer , since , of all those who
' disturb me not ( the girl replied )
whereof love drinking unaware
bellay , first garland of free poesie
beside the ships but nestor . all are gone
but when you go to the big league , boy ,
back to life 's rills he yearns to wander ,
visit the earth , with plenty .
" where the skin is broken open ,
' t was not so much as david had ,
terrible as medusa , the grey flesh
that bids the world 's vain tumult cease .
bring forth may flowers .
and the old hours pass through it
for i must live a strict recluse ,
i am exalted in my own esteem .
were darkened in the homes of men ,
in the great hour of life that men call death
you will hear upwelling
with port at thirty - six ;
martyrs and seers , the saved and lost ,
with scintillant flames some perched on towers remote
away , on wings away
god never would send you the darkness , 155 .
ll . 427 - 30 .   " that trade 's proud empire " , etc .   these last four
with merciless scourge , and levelled with the ground
the land , like grubs , and spare not
what 's the deer and the maukin to me ?
valley - lilies overhead ,
than on the plain before , whence thus i spake :
said gunther , " wilt thou help me , siegfried tried and true ?
we saw it rolling , fold on fold ,
who the gloomy mist so cold
spake he thus in supplication :
" and ghastly on her mouldering sepulchre !
shall rise to judgment -- hush'd in solemn awe--
was yellow , too ,
of dimpling light , and with the current seem to glide .
to outlooks wild and high ,
urged on his ears : " beware of punic fraud ,
long not for fruit when you gaze on the blossom ,
they are all belonging , dear babie , to thee .
they 'd both eat together ,
and tiny bells in far - off elf land ringing ,
rather from thee should man , the soldier , learn
with lifted feet , hands still ,
her deep blue eye o'erflowed with tender sheen ,
and then of course the circle much admires ,
i am soft sift
crashing on the rocks and boulders ,
what is there to know ?
ils choisiront , comme feraient les bons vanneurs ,
blood and bone !
in ae constellation shine ;
¡ padre del universo , sol radioso ,
most of all when lunch is laid
the fate - foretelling prophet thus reply'd:--
through thee , alas !   are dead , or have to die ,
lurid limits , loud with thunder and the roar of flaming cone ,
flooding and feeding the parched land
the maiden 's vow
i hear the water , and the wave is white
but not for long : for fierce meriones ,
" seiz'd with a sudden fear , we run to sea ,
the maid who modestly conceals
that laid my benefactor low !
he dares not to the grove draw nigh ,
we will send him the sons whom our wives have nursed ;
wherever he sailed he ever wept ,
so mian fuzla got up in the bottle and sent me a
of his own youth,--its ardors -- its promise of fame--
if i could take my bunny dear with me to bed at night ? "
' god bless you both , my children dear ; '
" the mother smiles and rejoices
the definition on my mind ,
life was made greater by their sweetheart prayers .
there is not a story of faith and truth
a duck , whose tender breast reveals
with shrilly pipe , or , from the rose - hung hedge ,
he watched the thistle - down drift and pass ,
their art that to the earth 's end the sound went forth . when i
of paradise and eden 's happy plains ,
you glory in your typewriter ,
as nations , ignorant of god , contrive
upon that mountain pass ,
all ways of winding subtlety i knew ,
to her fond husband liberty and life!--
never descended with so swift a motion
then once again the avenger drew the bow ,
while the brave father stood with tearless eye ,
my heart can not give up its own ;
then , like a musical adept ,
by which thou maist untwine
because the folk are stubborn against duty ;
very often for some kisses :
and , god mercurie ! of me now , woful wrecche ,
that with him were , so captivated seemed ,
till alien eyes from paradise
accompanied with , or prepared for , the well inchaunting skill of
rogero stands aloof , with wary ward
the amazons , and burns amidst the thousands of the field ,
lusty gallants , country lovers .
but if you find madam gives herself any immoderate airs at your
she towered , her wisdom and high inspiration ,
it is a pleasant thing to watch
what matter ? i have given desire his cloudland palace ,
his wife from ráma ’s home to wrest .
tho ' poor in gear , we 're rich in love ,
in caves beneath the mountain steep .
though we well might have known that the clever
which they did not bank nor save ,
might aiblins waur't thee for a brattle ;
gave way not for the rays to pass , their song
you are old , father william , the young man cries
ambrosial - fruited , creeping on the earth ,
then ever keep unbroken and unstained
“ my ponderous hand , to fight addressed
or else a little conservative !
deme fidem ; nec aget , nec erit jam nomen amoris :
and the heart is sore ;
he had an intrigue with the cloud
they followed ; whom when arthur seeing asked
" a boon , thou noble knight ,
what should i care that mine is done ?
the evening sees in poor estate .
the sapphire sheet of eve is shot ,
the darkness from the light ,
house - top . and in her dreams the cruel aeneas seemed to drive her
is but a drab inglorious street ,
thou then begin , as younger : ' twere not well
sing the vengeance of the welshmen of tirawley .
personal communication with his sovereign ,
then let this humble ivy - wreath enclose ,
the man whose silent days
with nevermore this too remorseful air upon her face ,
entered according to act of congress , in the year 1849 ,
now that beyond the ' accursed stream she dwells ,
and here is a rhyme
i gelwir am dir am dud tymer .
but thought that many a year would pass
gret lordys more and lesse ,
they smite it so hard , and they smite it so well ,
a song of hapless lovers ; in the shade
" come back to water , wood and weir !
i said the small - pox has gone out of late ;
when you know the dream is true
was shown the castle on the rocky mount ,
and dark mayenne was in the midst , a truncheon in his hand :
sings in the shrouds , and calls us to depart ,
then , still upon his journey bent ,
to show the absence of her eyes and voice ,
dead in his chair . the sun 's expiring rays
the year that napier sail'd , my years were ten--
yea , draws them still , though now he sits waist - deep
past the might of earth - dwelt
shall not be at war one with another . " ( d. and c. 45:69 ) .
with the truth that leaps from me .   we two meet again
' tween sea and sky -- the banner of the storm ,
i reached a tree , where i had to stay ,
we are weary of women and song !
ah ! the road of life is rugged ;
none he finds with strength sufficient
song , " how delicious is the
let none admire
can alone claim my tribute of tears .
how shall we spend the day ?
i am the largest drop in the whole pane . "
" a gandertate for sheriff de coose - beholders run
ne'er fail in old scotland !
the tiger
in his chariot , attended
gentle as falcon ,
euen as a river swelling ore her bounds ,
of peace , is the sincere wish of him who has the honour to
he lets another do his job ;
thou art a man among the rest .
beheld i comparable aught to thine ,
hark ! that shock like muffled thunder ,
should , in a fit of temperance , feed on pulse ,
day dawns beyond the atlantic sea ;
if i should ask him , then , what tempests dread ,
' tis amusing to behold
last dark mew
to the saviour 's waiting arms .
skipping through a grove of lindens ,
or the deevil a ceevil word to god
an ' in a den spied nine dead men ,
flash on these fingers of one hand--
in my youthful days ' twas ne'er thought a treat ,
era -- will , he hopes , be obvious .   it was part of his design ,
which these , while they lasted , might once have procured .
and rising from the dim - wood glen ,
that thou drawe in be frendlihede
of sleep , and fairy dreams unfurled ,
while flitting , gay , the swallows play
with love 's name sealing up its starry speech -
that even now is stealing over them ,
as well know you and i !
since my mother did not weel
the armed saracens , and barbed steeds .
--one , by his daily fare 's vulgarity ,
what i wanted at night was in prospect to - morrow .
and the appointed burial i can give
two very voices of thy summoning bell .
some con it low at desolation 's knee ;
_ what can a wanderer bring
every red letter
unless he 's sent up on some hasty dispatch ,
day with a dead man 's eye.--
that on manners he lectures his countrymen gratis ,
he bares to all the garden ground ,
to dirtie drosse , no higher dare aspyre ;
but it was an empty stomach .
his comrade 's words sir hagan approv'd as just and right .
nor i myself . hence venturing at thy call ,
  a. schlemm , _ de fontibus plutarchi commentationum de aud . poet . _
where 's hipparchia , and where is thais ,
i knew you would n't let me pick them all . "
raging return'd : nor was it well for her
or bind the sheaves where the reapers reap ;
alone , and held as cheap each living swain ,
down in the town a clock strikes six ,
faintly sound the falling feet ;
along the greensward uniformly pricks
a flash of lightning , if he thwart the road ,
in love they lived , in love they died ,
recent work , contributions to the textual criticism of the divina
a ghostly throng -- the grave mistake ,
the greatest and the best of all the main ,
volker the fiddler : / a warrior grim is he .
montmartre with its distant mills .
one scarce could keep one 's path aright
wood was failing to the craftsman ,
and neither had i strength to cry or wail ,
time was that stormy deep ,
my bird is gone ! what shall i do ? "
below , before , and far away
when all the streams are dried .
millions of little growing folk
look ! we must mourn for france so sweet and fair ,
then i 'll not grieve ; nay , more , i 'll not allow
with powers united , obstinately bold ,
i sigh , i turn , i weep .
and so absorbed was he , he failed
to lay at arethusa 's shining feet .
nae blyther than your bonnie sel ' ,
by my side a comrade stands ;
dreary desert sand of dead habit ;
vuestros padres , alzados en arvas ,
but never a blush -- a conscious glance ;
“ and there that day , so soon to shine ,
where never a hope has died .
the purple - fish that dyed it red ,
while the heroes fell to weeping ,
each went in to her task .   alone
are welcoming with eloquence outpouring
is , and how much gold and silver there is in the sack he gave
earnest for leave to live and labour well ,
simpleton ! will you never learn
" thou flowest still , o river ,
her laws , and prescient spake the coming guilt .
by night , amid the asterisms i glide , the dappled moon !
fluttering about the van ; red admirals rich ,
strepitus fremitus clamor tonitruum et rudentum sibilus .
just as the wines some wizard of yore
and looked away , and said . . . ' say paul , boy,--listen--
full of the art of brewing beer ,
lo , all our pomp of yesterday
among us when " god save the queen "
from its extremest summit to the ground ;
tricipitem adduxit hydra generatum canem ,
and can this fragrant lawn
she left the royal hounds mid way ,
now in a kittle case ance mair
he holds her by one berry - brown wrist ,
now i leave this cottage lowly ,
for where are honours , places , gifts bestow'd ,
_ tramp , tramp , the grim road , the road from mons to wipers
tell how by love she purchased blame .
to my own reflection upon the subject .
and rolls the ocean lower than the land .
by virtuous acts distinguish every hour :
hem hindre in eny other wise ,
and in expression fearless , firm , and bright .
earlier and separate old saxon retelling of the biblical " book of
bare a rug of soft wool , and phylo bare a silver basket
and , falling at her feet upon the rock ,
and slept all standing like the trooper 's horse ;
hear me , ye venerable core ,
but lo ! he is nearing his heart 's desire ;
owre many a weary hag he limpit ,
that had been with her in old , happy hours ,
brave son of tydeus ! false to my intent
the wind sends hither
is doubtful ; that he never will is sure .
when , like committed linnets , i
with carcasses and arms th ' ensanguind field
the end -- perhaps your grave .
she hass an illness look of peing ted . '
with manners pleasing and with accents just ,
is you neber heah it sed
the young and scornful gods -- he heard them laugh!--
take your leave ! ' "
you know how they never perish ,
in wet wood and miry lane ,
and questioned whence and where and why ,
the scenes to be acted were not very new ,
of great ryches : and euer to lyue in care
he first , as though their rede to ask ,
and they that fondly show it
it 's time to take the window to see leerie going by ;
and while the dark eyes glittered , seated him
with all these townes what thing haue we to do ?
in that blue suit of his :
had hunted me with his fatal breath ;
passions , like elements , though born to fight ,
pet dandelions blossom in the shade
the violets fret to fragrance ' neath your feet ,
maiden with the meek , brown eyes
' tis bound by a thousand bands to my heart ;
that love my friend ; and that they know full well
from the terror of flight , or the gloom of the grave ;
public ensign one opposes the yellow lilies , and the other
nothing remaines but poesie to fall :
and pity for poor souls , and vague regret
at the first plunge the horse sunk low ,
took extra implements along ,
with the sorrow that beauty is less strong than time . nor is the
as meerly things of course .
and is not he forgot ?
nor is he pictured truly ; greater far
the archbishop dealeth a thousand blows
shall flourish on thy brows , and be
at places inconvenient , and unusual ,
no more with joy we view that lovely face
it is , and the stir is there .
on the track of the hunted slave ,
it off , and said the other one was mine .
from off the firmament above let down
" the wig , the wig , my friend -- while you
i saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle - flags ,
bereavement added much to the natural sternness of mr popham 's
long live king john !
still , strew , with joyous hand , the wheat
wool down on the legs .
.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .      he looked to heaven :
weep'st thou , fair infant , wherefore weep ?
her soul could have saved forevermore .
the heaven - betrothed breast :
and no one any longer quarrels
the king acastus . but an evil counsel concerning me found
now tell me if you can , sir . "
what matter if with changed song they come back ?
intil , into .
there goes no fire from heaven before their thunder ,
now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn , chosen bands of the
that love and peace without alloy
thou shalt bestow ; suppose these armed lines
needs a sapient defender--
a pictured beauty ,
yet when the spring next woke the earth to laughter
with throbs and throes , and ah 's and oh 's .
this leafy ecstasy .   sweet words may cull
so memory strives to make the darkness bright ;
the blade--
these formed harmonies with lake - deep eyes ,
take courage , worn pilgrim , nor sink in despair ,
hay ! bud tha 's stown(4 ) a rare slice o ' my heart .
anna in black , the judge in scarlet robes ,
drives away , that i too must be off the next minute ,
a burst , a whistle , a scrum , a kick into touch ;
that they never grow languid and never tire,--
on her bright eastern hill ,
perhaps its wings are made of glass--
match upon a wager .
but faith that soars to seek the sky
the day 's march
as these youth , and not alien
the realm of darkness with its prince 's air ;
but now at last his own right hand the stark numanus slays ,
ulysses , who i fear is going about in just such rags as this
a rose - bud fresh and fair ;
upon the marches whiche he soghte .
from levites void of truth and shame ,
unto whose simple heart mine were all upon earth ,
we bade each tree record our vows ,
o beg ye grace for those , that are on earth
" i feel some curse .   o , five were there ? "
then to silvia let us sing ,
and those the rest , whose bones are gather'd yet
" what thou seest , " the modest youth thereupon made her answer,--
and looking round my eyes fell deep
of the rosiest mien from their glory subside ;
though you who are , alas ! of middle age
of alabaster that repeats
but standeth like a stone in death - like guise ,
by those dread gods from out whose awful faces
_ still on his head , well trained in lore _
who , trick’d with gold , and glittering on his car ,
said one sister to the other ,
do n't say nay ,
trust to your hands and the makers of the sea ,
safe where i hope to lie too ,
while over the water the papers cried ,
_ lear _ , learning .
for want of the rider , the battle was lost ;
blame - worthy , and with no sufficient plea .
on a shore where gray rocks break them ;
unto this lord he dradde him sore ,
once more to rear her crumbling walls ;
thine eyes and on thy forehead gaze ;
so from the mosque , whose arabesques above--
cherry - stones , transported by birds , 188 .
o bona patria , num tua praemia plena tenebo ?
and , for the more part , al is untrewe
yet , if persuaded by no lay of mine ,
but the place is scarcely warmer
shall go in gladness ;      again shall their spirits
more than the tongue
fierce mandricardo both at once defied .
our dead again .   vain are the tears we weep ,
you sitting alone there , dark , with shut eyes crying ,
has been drawn through your record of marriage .   though men
hic dum terra vix'it . . . . . . .
and a farm house , white as snow ,
exploring barren heath and mountain hold ,
levantó la cabeza el poderoso
arose ; the very house - walls seemed to bend ;
no more , my goats , shall i behold you climb
if he would give consent .
armed to lead his people into battle -- for his age stayed him not .
nine tall arcadian sons , in bloom of youthful pride .
afton 's laird ! afton 's laird , when your pen can be spared ,
sleep then , o earth , in thy blue - vaulted cradle ,
yet you pursue sage solomon 's advice ,
where light came sparkling thro ' the greenwood eaves ,
strong troy in vigour and in strenuytie ;
learn , nor account the pang ; dare , never grudge the throe !
was it not given to thee and me -- thee too ?
only to show , how many tastes he wanted .
heareth him not at the cool of the day .
for some few gasping moments ; like a lance ,
and booming cannon rent the air .
no he de callar por más que con el dedo ,
so spake the cherub ; and his grave rebuke ,
fast - tethered by a strong and weighty chain
by too severe a fate ,
him in the great desert , " have pity on me ! " i cried to him ,
en he 'll pay you when at las '
and found no light ,
the gods were enuious wh[=e ] they made those sins
a speedy dove through the clear welkin went ,
as his own father 's risen on the eastern air ,
of woe , ' when he beheld me minos cried ,
glory of him that made them to transform
he oft all lesys that coueytes all to haue
the friends of satan quite . "
and gaze far , far away
" true will i ever serve them , " / --so spake the noble thane--
besides , two kids , that in the valley strayed ,
to - night we strive to read , as we may best ,
i can not appraise you , yet strangely the sight of you
was gazing on the fawn and strangling it , and the fawn was
hold all of spring within our hand .
some on the fire the reeking entrails broil .
you never turned out feeble farce
" you the leader of the robbers ,
o nightingale that on yon bloomy spray
will serve to be queen of a may - pole ;
what tho ' thy woods , america , contain
' tis her _ fete_--so , although retrospection is pleasant ,
as one , for some foul crime pursued ,
but she guesses he is near ,
and heard the sparrows cheeping .
elsewhere there are hills and valleys ,
" but you 're looking _ down ! _ " the blackbird said .
the watchful viper of the evil tongue;--
do whatever i will , i can not call up her image ;
and receive my papal blessing . "
five cents a quarter , ten cents a side ,
and ravening fishes numerous nibbled bare .
a thousand years from now -- in time 's swift flight--
of heaven 's own light about it , though its leaves
and they fought ; and with leonine wrath were they met till
methinks i see , and sicken at the sight ,
drops , trickling down the windows paused or slipped ;
yes , venus ' turtle doves , i wean ,
but sadly shiver
to know full well that all the rest
smooth flow thy lays , infusing as they roll
called many a gone and goodly one to shape a sign ,
has so little ale acquired ,
dark , narrow cell , inhaling from a crack
that ner was there grevaunce of hot ne cold--
a hundred feet of breadth from side to side
but feeling the words with her finger , gibbering in fits ;
ever will he , thy brother , honour thee
i saw two thousand pots , some speaking , and some silent ;
bumping your head on the pew in front ,
" here enter on a ladder far less steep
when god sends a new duty
i hear the train'd soprano ( what work with hers is this ? )
' e tells me jim gets ' ere nex ' day , at four .
stems of roses in their teeth ,
whereon the heavy golden circlet lay .
musing over a phantom image , born of fantastic hope and fear ,
faint was the air with the odorous breath of magnolia blossoms ,
and he thought in his dream that his soul took flight
and he to me : ' the lords of heresies
of constant law , enduring through all change ;
but legacies in blossom ? our lean soil ,
who spake like water , danced like careful showers
possess a secret silent dwelling - place ,
whether his first design be to withdraw
like to bubbles when rain pelteth .
for matthew was a true man .
and i said , " good - by to _ you _ ! "
but we , sad outcasts from our native reign ,
' twas yesterday the homeward - honking geese
my memory grasps a hollow dream .
three jolly gentlemen ,
care you still soft hands to press ,
they do enclose and fortify ,
nor friend , nor wife i give my utmost pity ,
till time be on our side
" ah , and in days to come ,
perceived it . ' twas the pew where lincoln sat--
king , my form is thy shade ,
can , ne'er be chain'd by man 's endeavor ;
the southern stars ,
they linger , gaul and briton , side by side :
he with those two , or more , a lance must break .
the trumpet spake not to the armed throng ;
don juan 's parents lived beside the river ,
the dusky children of the sun
art thou : but thoughe all men be dylygent
obliuion all thy former acts do couer ,
the dove must settle on the cross ,
that townes and castles under her brest did coure * ,
since our last siege we have not seen :
like heaven in a lake ,
thou shalt dry my tears , lass , and i 'll dry thine .
reprieved the relics of the grecian band :
bonnie clouden , as ye wander , vol . ii . , 230 .
into mother - filled lands .
_ and as to the stories you 've heard ( no ,
he could hide the summer through
are blessed in the framing and the act ,
of a boat mounted upon such a car , or a real boat
with the blue above , and the blue below ,
let him speak his mind .
her mightie hoast against my bulwarkes brought ;
about the attic overhead ;
health ;
unthrifty of its beauty ; lilies too
i heard her voice ; my heart was rent ,
while the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof ?
with parted lips and breathing soft and calm ;
which when she viewed , a vision fell
illas nempe rosas , quas conscia purpura pinxit ;
on the cross the dying saviour
'' tis a fine country , teague , one needs must say ,
--"yes , yes , there , sleep , poor creature of a merciful god ! " he
forth to the ear , by smallest pebbles struck .
þat for lot þat þay lansed ho laȝed neu{er } .
with thy great lord ; i sitting at thy feet :
a gallant knight came riding by ,
as nature meant , supreme alone ;
across the gate ; she jumped him low ,
from this moment take command ,
in their beauty , in their pride .
you come around,--tel ' plum daylight ,
when odoric , to all pact , all faith , untrue ,
past primrose wood , past brady ride ,
his num'rous flocks and fatted herds consume .
the green and yellow linnet .
fondly to my bosom take him ?
madd'ning with rage to view the lusian band ,
many familiar with his well - sung woes ,
peace to him , with the knowledge that , far off ,
o'er the waste they scoured in shadowy numbers ,
is due to thee , in care remiss .
blow thou now thy honey flute - notes ,
and many a verse:--
about hobby - horse ?
and often when my comrades praise ,
and the third , a neighbour from her village .
she knows where'er there cease to be
straightway to the rich land of lycia , where his brothers and
" she is not dead till ye have murdered me ! "
he soweth no corn , and none he doth reap :
hued like the webs that twilight weaves
our clothes laid by your trees !
prince eugene of austria is in the market - place ;
a turn , in such wise that toward the east i faced again . nor thus
which oped to kiss the sky .
and leash the spartan pack ; nor is the brake
with leather girt herself instead ,
as soon as i had heard those souls tormented ,
the goodness let me bound ,
_ out of your heart this ' gloria ' ! _
hos non hostilis dextra , non terra edita
unstrung , and o'er her shoulders there did go
if ceÿx felt them , or his head was rais'd
wild echoes of wild woodlands and the hunt ,
inquiring how he attained it ; there is consequently no mention of
plump as a partridge was i known ,
or its distant shores espied ;
whether it be new or old .
his seat he takes , his eyes upon his lord .
and heard the words that one by one
and such viands should be tasted without any scot of repentance
" in which all modern bards agree " .
a prudent living man is known to say ,
and all the earth is gay ;
though pale , yet happy , asked her not a word ,
she hath quiet , smiling eyes ,
who saith -- but why all this of what he saith ?
" in all that maketh knighthood / right proud they stand of mood .
küss ' ich deinen roten mund .
is the dust that they must gain ,
he never led a better corps to war .
our labour'd , puny passion - fits--
but shortly he had cause to be content .
friendly , the everlasting stars ?
from the garden just below
fiercely and high ;
reason to seek and hold ,
he passed his best years in the lonely bush , and wrote largely
you can not pass beyond our boundless love .
and the afterdays that bring ,
mohareb in the robes of royalty ,
did not listen to his calling .
the flame of the moon ran under my eyes
quevedo swears that eve and helen
black in the shade of the o'er - hanging hill ,
she 'd fosh near auchteen hunner .
his seasons , hours , or days , or months , or years .
the silly lambs : pure thoughts are dead and still ,
and dryad learnt to drink ,
spend , harmless shade , thy nightly hours
the trump of bannered war , the sighs and groans
without , judged by the sound , all hell was loosed .
" o , de stones on de graves is look white lak de sheep ,
and let the hands that ply the pen
with a very fast horse of " remarkable dash . "
if like a lamb he could his looks translate !
" as for my past , i was a dog , a cur ,
that i 've heard the old blind man recite his own rhapsodies ,
flatter me in this way with vain hopes . it is not for any such
and in the vineyards , where the grape is ripe ,
playing with his face a - smile , with the arts and
" my dear ,
the atoms , as their own weight bears them down
when by such heads and hearts directed ,
the welfare mainly of the thing it loves ,
a stern frown , even as when he lay , with wrath
( with little regard for the creatures they squeezed ) ;
but , with all the charms that splendor grants ,
into the self that none would understand .
from the rocks where fierce gales blew it ,
time 's wing so swiftly never seem'd to fly ;
who seeks secure to rule , be first her care
tell mother see how metters stood ,
and leer'd like a love - sick pigeon .
" caw ! caw ! our nests now let us build . "
i with a difference wore my weight of woe .
to follow their slain monarch 's hearse this night ,
the fleet descendant of aeacus , and among them stood achilles
heartily .
for the arms of the maple have held in their cover
thou couldst have later done things still more grand ?
spirit of might and sweetness too !
menelaus you will win honour and thanks from all the trojans , and
doves of the fir - wood walling high our red roof
this my good sword now girt unto my side
moonlight ebb and flow
iron jelloids the great tonic ]
muestra la noche gentil ;
moping along the streets , and cursing my day as i wandered ,
goodly game has a god brought to this house . the stranger
there whence ' tis cast until it , towering , feels
to cheer the heart and nerve the arm--
the man in red who reads the law
my leader said : " along this place one ought
like some strange chieftain o'er his band .
the guardian - god now trembled for her wall ,
this is the glass i always feared ;
what female heart can gold despise ?
some are buff - color'd , some mottled , one has a white line running
and now the wreath was all completed , save
the shepherd led his sheep afar .
had she told me fifty shillings ,
perhaps , " mused richard , " for some funeral ? "
and here , as one , who clears himself of blame
and i says to him , " how 's the ould hound ? "
endued the realm with brain and hands and eyes ,
wi ' merry dance in winter days ,
are we babes that we should clamour for a vengeance on the sea ? "
wrapp'd in enchantment , like the dream
' tis the charming little cupboard where the jam - pots grow .
should we do this , our joy will never cease--
o roads that journey to fairyland !
whereat the valiant volker / these words to them addressed :
o blessed saviour mine !
lust entering here ,
aft has he doudl'd me up on his knee ;
the weary pund o ' tow ,
" i mean estelle has always held the purse . "
with   the   greatest gusto ,
flash'd down a sword and smote him on the shoulder--
for with immortals
i will give to them the wisdom
and giddy miss helen was drown'd .
but sleep will not come to mine eyes .
her female kindred of thy father 's house ,
they kindle raptures sweet ,
has glimmerings of it . newton never saw
that thou hereafter known shalt be ,
not the minstrel in the moment
on luminous chasms that cleft the basalt town ,
as through an arch the violent roaring tide
bore up a little car ;
and , out of my immediate dread
deep is the air and dark , substantial , black ,
as when benigner winds more swiftly blow ,
like a glow - worm golden
experience of karshish , the arab physician , " with the calm
the hye arystotyll of godly wyt and pure
charge to fall and swim to drown .
for myn astat schal so be lassed . "
" it would not be prudent at present to part ;
or , governed by a boisterous whim ,
because i asked him if june would come !
with shaking bridle rings .
waiting for you to give your orders , so make haste and let us be
they telephoned again for him--
" whom ills of every sort await !
ikshváku ’s son , ayodhyá ’s king ,
and makes him comprehend the beauty rare
and folowe the same for they ar sure and right .
and they found they liked each other ( which is often
the many toil in sorrow ,
and made my wish so full of eagerness
forward , by your right !
the rocks have lain asleep so many a year ,
you said the same ; and are you discontent
and thus bespake the sergeants and the rout :
leader of much people whom a naiad nymph had borne to otrynteus
i never dared be seen by him .
( a bitter change ! ) severer for severe :
silent , he calls me to his feet .
and the water round and o'er them
thou hast made many houses for the dead ;
sounds as well as thoughts have relation both between each other
reach rustum , where he sits , and tarries long ,
and leaves fall from her , one by one .
all eyes are fix'd on you : your foes rejoice ;
her son 's returning face , but ruthless fate
is not the rebel shelley knew .
things beyond the cognisance of sense . thus there is no
when a fierce growl smote on her frightened ear ,
and the rain drips ,
that in the fire she hardly had been noted .
the countess of wemyss my mother ;
and tears to misery from the inmost heart
so wayward , that she is without a peer :
in a cradle of misfortune .
better , but in wit thou art a weakling . yea , thou hast
unpublished volumes of his " ballad collections " are now in the
the birthplace of valor , the country of worth ;
a sight , pale envy to convulse , )
and i draw more nigh .
that acquiescence vain :
it was a dark and thunder - stormy night ;
how then should rash intruding glance
as soul and body in that state
but makes its own will of another 's will
would have run his head in a " rooshun " battery .
with cries of " ba - a ! " and " murder ! "
anon she spies many a youthfull lord ,
eve 's snake to bruise and slay--
like one whirled down under shadowy seas ,
and woman 's heart was still an unsolved puzzle ;
where saving knowledg doth abide ,
owd rivock end an ’ all arahnd
and flings the spindrift down the gale ;
by practice and the mind 's experience ,
deep - toned -- telling perhaps of peace .
mother reads it to me :
until the noiseless maid will lift the latch .
and " send for ransom ! " thorkill cried ,
at so great art of nature , and inspires
that we would speak , but can not say in words ,
and buzz and chafe importunate as chafers ,
they widen and heighten , they cloud and brighten
the frailty of all worldly love )
two noble sons had he , to wit
of bloom brushed off -- there lies the broken web .
stood , with its huge gnarled roots of seeming strength ,
his absent wife still seemed to see ,
  too scared to speak , with shriek on shriek ,
one place is full of both , yet each
with claws on either end . two arms stretched out
like to a mountain spring so pure , you thought :
_ and i laid the pipe aside . _
when all who would come seeking in new hampshire
and the fox 's sledge will take thee ,
with gold - laced hat and golden - headed cane !
to dwell for ever and rejoice ,
through jesus let us conquer self ,
your shins and ankles , calves and knees ,
still he liked the baron 's manner .
yet in that furious fight
or else they proves the curse o ' drinking ;
from herd 's ms .   versions occur in polish , german , magyar ,
a blanket hides the breeches,--
if we could give them surer , quicker proof--
' t is the same to me
city , and his the shame if we are vanquished . therefore let us
oh , could i see thae days again ,
' and then i woke , and for a space
within , without , they are a field of tares :
" gat like a child forth from my fertile womb ,
thine epitaph writ fair in fruitage eloquent ,
adorned with globes , that reel , as drunk with light .
if such escape contagion , and emerge
to serven , and been y - lyke ay diligent ,
to find a rhyme t ' ye ;
yet burns out thy life 's lamp in vain !
nam os columnatum poetae esse indaudivi barbaro ,
and knocked you rather flat ? '
whose roots are hillocks where the children play ;
you would soon be lighting such a candle in england
ere the rash phoebus break her cloister
save thine and mine , no other eyes
con que el toro se adornaba :
wafting the olden
or mountain goat , his bulky prize , appear ;
no eye can see the aureole shine
let mortals never take a vow in jest ;
and the havoc did not slack ,
the whimp'ring creek breaks on the stone ;
the servant begg'd he would be still ;
filling all the land with plenty .
" with wedded truth my hand hath worn ;
i only feel , i only know
and a spirit may but weep that lies
' tis because resentment ties
" shame on thy gentle face , so frank and fair ;
as loving and longing i lie ,
" deem me not fond ; but in my warmer youth ,
with maiden - hair ; and how , in guardian - wise ,
made of a clean strait oaten reed ,
save him , save him , lucile ! save my son ! save my son ! "
will be always acceptable .   vere , of the blues ,
( i judge by a certain calm fervour
the beef and damper are passed about
and you have feasted on the booty ,
but he flies like a flash when he 's after his prog ;
by the banner 's voice and the child 's voice and sea 's voice and
holds dearest ! thou wouldst deign by proof t ' unfold
as pastoral minstrels in her merry train
who in his soft hand crushed a violet ,
the hard corrosion of my thought , and i
whirring , whirring--
i name you , daughters of this man the king ,
never woke him with its thunder ,
and you shall pant in flowing seas of air ;
then , with a crackling peal , the thick black vail
snaw - white stockins on his legs ,
that curse god send unto mine enemie !
and on the dark twigs of the planes
with firm address and foreign air ,
plain , ' tis true , yet horse and rider
the sad , strange failure theirs who mourn in vain ! "
as some are ever , when the destiny
in a cot by the brook ; in a cot by the brook .
what sholde i lenger proces of it make ?
the grandeur of her soul ?
the theologian gravely said :
ahint the joy there cam ' sic rue .
and protect them from all evil ,
sweet heart , sit down under this shadowed tree ,
rhyme got sore heels and wanted to fall out .
then with transition sweet new speech resumes ]
_ and while life 's lusty banner flies ,
of dancers , as their leaflets shook .
rose like an anthem , rich and strong,--
on ruffled feathers , a snatch of song ,
bright angels hover round her way to shield till life shall wane ;
thus spake the angered monarch to the half - concealed
and was n't it uncommon shabby
what dark and acid doses life prefers
and now from far the mingling clamours rise ,
before the strangers , in such unheard rage !
the horrible giants , whom jove menaces
prime virtues ; and that these include no action but that of the
thin yhe and ere , as i have spoke ,
when the loosed storm breaks furiously ?
though of mary 's great abbey the primate am i. "
yea still more blest in ráma ’s reign .
dreams of the sun of joy !
pages is nothing of the sort ; it is merely a third - rate
was named of him to whom he owed his birth ) ,
and , from the angle of thy perfect sight ,
might have hurt , truly , but this ,
" the refrain you 've studied a meaning had ,
shall kindle up its living fire
with feet immortal wending ,
i say , therefore , then blame me not ,
beauty can do no wrong .
and let them bathe , till their own morn say , rise ;
to win despair .   no crown
fly as far as star can guide us , far as conquered billows bear .
father and mother ,
that would , as soon as e'er she _ shone , straight _
in the thronged forum , or the sages ' seat ,
( 1 ) in the philosophy of lucretius the world is conceived as
showing -- then blotting from our sight!--
little brother , he can rustle
'cause all the little childerns there 's so straight an ' strong
the biting axe of florence .   farther on ,
till ' e finds ' isself one mornin ' with a full an ' proper kit .
and afterwards the tartar king 's , he steeled ;
and an army to fight for the people and throne .
to the meadows of wainola ,
to his owne great synnes gyuynge none aduertence
" can not some one go up to the trap door and tell the people what
stars unnumbered drifted through the sky .
and his azure waves
make all there is in love so true .
“ say , who leads that band to - day ,
and _ feel _ my immortality !
ye have but my seas to furrow . go forth , for it is there ! "
related of the hall of hutton john , an antient residence of the
now shroudis the shawis
father . howbeit , as for him he lieth in an island suffering
hand grew dry ;
of southrons o'er their pliant tool,--
i have never had the teaching ,
and by his kind , keen face ,
the old king whereon still we dine us .
the old adage says , “ what you find , you may keep it , ”
needed in human hearts for earth to see
and i wonder why he haunts me more than any other ghost .
for the lightening of men 's woes .
for all his issue , father of one child .
we hasten hither , to healfdene 's son ,
that for thy sake to any else i yield .
as parts , can see but parts , now this , now that ,
the wine poured forth turned into blood all loathly as it fell .
next springing up into the chariot 's womb
and leave my dimpled water well ,
that i may drink before i go ,
a nation has sprung into life
that were no longer for the sight .
cosily . they longed to know
that never wears out , and lays its head
now obvious and now averse , the sun .
their heads they cover , and their vests unbind ;
ev'n when your end 's attain'd ;
the morning came .   to the park of the peer
down lowliest ways , if god wills it so .
how was the coming granted him in largess ? "
and thus among those others be detained .
que mendigar sufragios de la plebe
once did i love and yet i live ,
_ on which , as on a glorious stranger , gaz'd
that thou would'st bear to the terrestrial day ? "
in looking at your pretty shapes ,
we stooped to the moorland and plucked the pale heather
say the bells of stepney .
and all her garb was dappled thick with blood
crimson and green , two blossoms of light ,
" what if the old cow blew her horn
inviting us ; and still the soul craves all ,
hand in hand as we stood
ye who pity , pity me ,
in those days for the new republic 's sake .
fair , more fair is mine in the ring of maidens ,
_ the castle ’s won _ , _ the castle ’s won _ !
my met - yard wi . . . ’
our mother bade us keep the trodden ways ,
it is not either uncouth , square , or grisly ,
floats the horned , yellow moon .
this song to myself did i oftentimes repeat ;
with a pair of twin daughters and wife dressed so smart ,
went forth to the chamber , but the goatherd who was within
gave me this afternoon the benefaction
the old sweet noises in the nests began ;
dear hills of old new england , look down with tender eyes
or , sure as fate , we 'll send you packing ! "
_ doodle _ , to dandle .
but humble stars and posies
where -- on each magisterial nose
no fatal axe will hew away your bowers ,
thunders aloud and bursts , so thundered the voice of the man .
the moon , on the breast of the new - fallen snow ,
starres indeed they are too true ;
never a carol or note of bird ,
sings the origin of iron ,
without e'er a wife ?
she quite forgot to send the doctor ,
and the breath of the bugle now wafted them o'er
this was all .
it may be a fairy - tale new ,
uncouther , and all fear the moonlight cold .
on thee with earnest eyes the nations wait ,
crest .
if i resolved to seek at length
we drank the wine of love .
whoe'er had skill in singing , on them hard labor lay .
that flickers weirdly on the icy wall .
if to be absent were to be
next , after silence long , and many sighs ,
y la misericordia , y todo cuanto
did he drink hard ?
be thy deliberate judgment , then the gods
hit arn þy werkeȝ wyt{er}ly , þ{a}t þ{o}u wroȝt haueȝ ,
winks at the glory of her face .
growing by the way ;
be not afraid . we shall be there , eh , friar ?
quick as thought the path he followed ,
in which i bear my trusty sword
sounds like an echo of c. s. c.
fair tho , the lassie be ;
unto the patriarch and seide :
" i feared deadly evil if long i stayed ,
through these secluded dells to cry
to slacken in his duty , and at length
yet filling all with tireless energy .
a castle , dawn - enchanted , there
had stolen upon our sleep ! for me was meant
i 'm sure the show appalled him ,
time in that world seems dead . nor jocund sun
who will embrace me in the world - to - be :
was real lovely .
birds they are busy about my face .
or duty drives us down ,
he quenched all doubt in caesar , and advised--
to save them from false sextus
" and anton shiel he loves not me ,
and one thing further make him know :
if love be not their sire ; or live long years
it 's nature , and it 's nothing .   it 's all nothing .
and overmasters like a destiny--
weepeth and waileth the knightly dead.--
but then , it matches trenches well ,
the town was in a tumult .
to birds . acheloüs . nymphs transformed into the isles echinades .
and merry minstrels play .
which thee shall cherish , clothe , and feed ,
in her alone to reconcile agrees
serve only thee !
that never a swimmer shall cross or climb .
arrows we breathe , not air .
be my redeemer ! " and with floods of tears
i care not for the glittering wain ,
thy sorrows ' -- weeping with her evermore --
april airs her graces ;
i think his love was great ;
but gurth the fowler laid one hand
with loathing , for i see
never rewarded with one glance of life
unwisely mourns . suffice it , that we know
bear little souls to heaven .
plough’d half his side , and bared it to the bone .
i can not for such cause contend ;
' n ' i guess it 'll cool her fiery nater ! "
“ hear , ye moslems ! hear , my turkish brethren !
" foes of my race ! " cried rua , " the mouth of rua is true :
nor blawing snaw 's inclemencie ;
my frailties no to see ;
in every thing , as men may se .
in the old hut?--on - rushing is the mind :
far less , if thou wouldst eat of us : thou gav'st
you must try to walk sedately .
' tis all souls ' night and the great christ church bell ,
back fell the sable frock and dreary cowl
versions .
cold on their throbbing lives ,
illumes me along ,
the sunbeams are my shafts , with which i kill
i felt his silver heel
was growing up in the mind of man
i know my temper 's wearin ' ,
nah tha’ll hev trubbles , ned , ta bear ,
my rivals give -- and let 'em ;
yet we do not pale .
nero , his wrecker , is amply wrecked since then ,
sent in a letter to moore , january 2 , 1820 - -
on hudson 's wave
if any , be a satire to decay ,
or think on him who bore thy name ,
like a herring gasping here ;
tripp'd by the fair , he tumbles on the mead ,
let the sharp saber tell him
bourgeons one generation , and one fades .   let but a few years
gate of heaven is shut and the clouds gather for the rains ?
sich dreist in jene menschenwelle ,
to grasp this sorry scheme of things entire ,
and all the graves of all the ghosts
e're lov'd and born away the wanton queen ?
there to converse with everlasting groans ,
( sweet - throat , come back !   o liquid , mellow throat ! )
balow , my child , thy mother mild
about the brows of solomon ,
row .   lude ] loved .   leir ] learn .   lair ] lore .   heynd ]
and features , the great soul 's apparent seat ;
for to be vanquish'd by a river 's force
the sign of valor true ;
there he lay -- like infant dreaming ,
whose cohorts hastened o'er the echoing way ,
from thence did soon to open streets aspire ,
as men love mistresses , and fought it well--
new laws from him who reigns , new minds may raise
had conscience more precise or passing pure .
of hector , and tritonis ' holy fane .
he worshippeth the christ ? what more ?
when all were slaves thou couldst around survey ,
east , west , north , south . then , then was battle indeed
and now i think of it , her voice
or seen what i seed that day !
ruhest du auch .
feel the merry breezes make the scaffold swing ;
a naked , probing mind .
and the deep holes , where i could find no ease
and there you were , disgraced and broke !
and the othman power is cloven , and the stroke
then , without proper warning , leave him ,
as one that shelters in the night , unknowing ,
where , in a brook ,
for his bugle .
as he surveys
orders of joy wherewith it is threefold . in this hierarchy are
ninety times as high as the moon ;
search the material tribes of earth , sea , air ,
to let the dirty plasma flow or dam it ,
that on mitylene 's
he reeled , and then fell stark in dust .
characters , and describes him as an aged man with large straight
unpetalled heart a dream discloses
tenochtitlan , ancient name of the city of mexico , temple of ,
and i wake in the night with my empty hands yearning in vain
was thy dream then , a shadowy lie ?
if death must be my certain portion , i ,
far in the liquid lake , we sate , and drew
whatever ills betide , whatever fate ;
from hostile hands , since thou art urged to seek
there is something strangely healing
then came the lady kriemhild / with a full stately company .
and stroking with mild airs our harmless hands
red - hair'd , thin - lipp'd , sly , supple,--and a scot !
for change , though sad ? to see what we have seen ?
& þ{us } watȝ þat londe lost for þe lordes sy{n}ne ,
oh ! raise us up , return to us again ;
westering comes , her footsteps light
an hundred miles , eight hundred miles of foam ,
an ' for us to hang on to the ditch that we held ;
what he shall claim of fame or pelf ,
the lions tore the hide of the huge prey
that towards the heaven rises highest from the sea . the sun ,
birch - trees with their hundred branches ,
and entering , met the maid , who held
when the moon is high
then accosting good sudeva -- damayanti thus began ,
scentlike above thy level seas and fills
is it that a year ago
with its myrrh - lilies--
bigger than a grove of pine - trees ,
but the princess , thus afflicted -- when the female train beheld ,
he hath endow'd .   hence now thou mayst infer
but , when the night was grown old and the two by the hearthstone
give me now my bride affianced ,
that closely by it grew .
blind guide with siren voice , and blinding all
with his magic songs lay yonder ,
watching his sheep through languid , half - shut eyes ,
of a county , that tibbot moyle ,
far from the footpaths of the thoughtless ,
here 's a health unto his majesty ,
for everything that 's lovely is
del mariano monte
a king and a father to place on his throne !
her robe was a vague circumambient space ,
a guiltless lady imprisoned :   after penanced
as tavern , shop , and sunday - school ;
he said to sheltering rose , in loving voice ,
thus , when from deep within our frame we force
i was sorry to see him deranged and perplext
first to the trojan , spent with toil , he came ,
dost thou guess what it is--
shall prove their love . "   thus did pompeius die ,
whether god himself is the author of evil ,
her miracles bold
to drink the ripe warm scent of soaking matter ,
and not attempt , by bias of a prayer ,
how they burgeon and unfold !
" o have you got houses , have you got land ,
" so may your memory not steal away
with hope for honey and song for wine .
still close to ráma lakshmaṇ kept ,
this contemn'd of a man ,
like a goodly belt around
to a tarry torch applied it .
and yet the winter 's breath is chill ;
than green or purple light ;
gineral c. is a dreffle smart man :
wisdom gain in early youth ,
go , get you into london with the burden of your freights !
as fell the wearer , and of sword on sword
the banks of helicon;--
flamed and awoke her slumbering magic .
to the bright windows of the sky ,
where none but demigods should dare to roam ?
" is n't it lovely , jack ! " exclaimed grace . " i 'm so glad i came ! "
what you 're unwilling to receive
that breathes the persian air , both young and old
with their powder - horns all emptied , like the swimmers from
is to my troubled heart a constant sting ,
the canvas flap , the rattle of the chain
two ranging hills ; one meadowed rich in grass ;
with such wepinge and with such cri
he them doth folowe and to theyr wordes enclyne
while unobserv'd , the glory of our nation ,
last night , while listening to the poetry
the bold of france . he lost the king 's favor , and charges of
tethered among the trees , not far from here .
gallo canente exterritos
the village spire
she closely drew her veil :
o happy pleasure ! here to dwell
' oo keeps our only village inn ;
beneath yon silvery cloud ,
kindness came down like the rain ,
small is each individual 's force :
as one who loves the wild day none the less
whene'er ye like to try .
lock up your cash in places howe'er strong ,
praise , blame , love , kisses , tears , and smiles .
and the lights of the streaming train
  from the edition of 1815 .
as a wild wind their branches swept .
with ashes of the hearth shall be made white
this city with a gate of gold .
with pitying eye beholds , yet fears not , death .
and he , which wolde his mercy sende ,
--to wit , in zion chapel meeting ,
are getting up and being dressed .
in each of my relative 's wills ,
we sate and talked of jesus ' death .
the lord of fire embodied came .
yet how good it is to come
where man can travel only in a thought .
her beauties , half reveal'd to sight ;
you may deal as you please with hindoos and chinese ,
at length to rest the squire reclines ,
and paint the gates of hell with paradise ,
the mice ran down ! "
spirits of old mariners
yet , am i like them , then ?
and after draining every glass ,
was greetin ' all alone .
were in the barn , secure and dry ,
ere it was noon , and still not satisfy
he cried : " make haste , make haste to bow the knee !
the while , with brimming glass , i spoke ;
fierce hero of gigantic mould :
and bring to memory dim imaginings
she walks among the meadow grass
o how unlike the place from whence they fell !
' i wish that he were come to me ,
but for the broken and desolate heart
perchance may also granted be ,
unloved , by many a sandy bar ,
naughtiness .   she was flying away from a tree where she had just
in passing ages all the form was gone :
he wandered , singing !
its noises sleep , and i ,
o fare thee weel , my bonie lass ,
the spoil of trojans slain ; for with my foes
smooth my hair .
wrote famous letters . it 's a shame ,
his healing lies , not in our own ;
he was ' ware of no presence except his own
might be renewed , and heart - ache chased away .
mine is the heart at your feet
and the planet of love is on high ,
euyr~ ase the gyant a - boue come ,
the men who ca n't remember when they learned to swing a pack ,
lullaby , lullaby , by - low .
how can i fail his will to do ,
so big , so solemn the old house seems--
be charm'd by all thou dost !
“ please ma’am i ’d take my oath ,
through the corridor 's echoes ,
the spirit which bent ' neath its power ,
one of the earlier poets invented the name and introduced it
was heard the world around :
dense golden cloud , that the very sun for all his bright piercing
’ mongst the hardy jutlanders ;
date .
moving athwart the evening sky ,
surge et praesentis iusta precare deos .
than riving thunders in aerial fields :
sweet vernal winters and december mays !
for this prince of worthy fellows--
obedience , beauty , law , while elenor murray 's
who twice each day the playhouse fills,--
" and if our gods are wrath , what wonder , when
proclaim the three kings ' day is drawing near .
softly rose , and set the tree - tops moving ,
they melt , they vanish from my eyes .
for the winter king is dead .
round and round the spicy downs the yellow lotos - dust is blown .
advice is sporting while infection breeds ;
screechowl , owl ,
the signs of intellectual pride ,
by lake and forest , marsh and hill ,
it 's that old stock ; an ' , more than that ,
i wept , as an old man might weep
with ' thoughts as boundless , and souls as free ' :
that , as the queen looked down on me ,
monody on a lady famed for her caprice
from the fire upon the island ;
below my feet the still bazar is laid--
in a delicious strain ;
back through the isle , and , at the beach arrived ,
the nations shall take note .   his unripe age
around dumas , and photographs made up
the ' miscellaneous works ' , 1837 , iv . 41 , it is said to have been
the lofty doors on brazen hinges sound .
all your passion and all your woe :
_ dūtika : _    hearken , hearken , beautiful kānāi :
for antenor how they wolde han criseyde ,
for who would rob a hermit of his weeds ,
but , if haply you ' scape from his telescope sight
we learn from horace , ' homer sometimes sleeps ; '
against heaven 's hand or will , nor bate a jot
unconquerably sally ;
i might arise in my large white cravat
her spirit it is , our key .
you needna ask me where .
and crowding shapes surrounded me
guve - southern slang for give .   guv , for give , is also
steal upon the blooming year ;
high overhead in the
the sudden sun smote angrily .
his prayers took their price and strength ,
_ or give the sun 's phlogistic orb to roll . _
yet ne'er have i heard said this thing :
farewell , farewell , my cup of earthly joy !
nor let thy heart be thus cast down ,
even so vile a worm as i might work
" from dead men 's marrow guides them best at night--
up in the air and over the wall ,
her delicate head
lived a tribe of fisher people ,
fair , city of the hundred spires ; the seat
the cunning foxes and wolves and bears ,
innumerable perils , he gets ashore on phaeacia .
i began with sir william hamilton 's lectures .
country gave a new stimulus to the imitation of italian
when sleep refused to come ;
do i remonstrate : folly wide the mark !
unvaried for the later editions .
half broken - hearted
training them , in blind selfishness , to deck
this thing no lengere is delaied ,
hither and thither pandering we strive ,
in the like fray . "   beyond the bridge 's head
deck , while as yet i am alive , and my children after me are
all my tools . "
tú simple , yo sin seso ,
sche waf a cloth of selk al whyt
where the careless glance but found , in expanses of plaster ,
yet all his words of love thou well mayst hear ,
in joyous welcome from the untroubled past ;
by my faith , there is feasting to come ,
then would ye wonder , and her prayses sing ,
of mighty strength , they met their fate
look breathless on and shudder while they smile--
give to us an equal portion ,
and yet , for auld lang syne ,
i went alone through a trail of deep forest
to keep the chariots all in due array ;
he sought to slay the lord most high ,
they placed him all unconscious on his seat
alterno tenebras et lucem tempore gigni ,
how in an hour the power which gave annuls
a scot still , but blot still ,
came to gaze on their beauty and speak in their praise
the rain - wind sighs , like one who mutters o'er
the morning of the memorable 25th . september . "   i can not resist
of day , yet unrevealed ?
the best part of the champions came on in warlike gear .
to see and taste those streames which are so cleare .
the sev'ral chiefs ? thou dost too much , old man . "
enamour thee , as that thou dost not turn
the tale of their dim life , with all
within a hay - sweet barn .
and lo , against the leaden cloud ,
one flew hither , and one thither ,
onward , onward , stopping never .
and contracted a stubborn cardiac hypertrophy
did ye ken the red bloom at the bend o ' the crag ?
or sing her artless strain at home ,
there are , then , tenuous effigies of forms ,
prolong'd the feast , and quaff'd the rosy wine
and enmity to , the gods . ]
at the first pause , the monarch said :
descended with such speed , it had not seem'd
night has brought men love ;
in the sweet ignorance that they are fair ;
for my misty meditation , at the second changin'-station ,
no nutrient streams from beauty 's orbs improve
once more , the long - since - torn hermaphrodite !
the surf on all the beaches tumbled treasures of meat .
so pretty was kathleen , my sweet little kathleen ,
he died , when last from pilgrimage i came ,
things such as these are asked in vain :
in this our england he needs crowd me so ?
bend to the earth our pliant knees ,
suche is a fole and well worthy a babyll
in fact , the railway wur e ivverbody ’s maath , what we singing and
and reproduce in earthly strains the prayers of the elected .
holy espousals ! whereat wept with joy
from growing commerce loose her latest chain ,
uplifting her small fingers.--"o , that hair ! "
thus closely with thee longer , take at large
i fain would have tasted your life - blood then .
speaking to me , virgilius of such words
that i keep my eye - beam clear .
and the colored lid re - echoes
into the night -- a melancholy sound !
( turning me at the sound of mine own name ,
a like gold bar above her instep roll'd
" such eyes of fire , such hair of gold .
" o , mother ! " cried a mournful chorus .
the deities he thus addressed
which from shed seed ariseth , upward wins
the dry earth drank his sweat , while in his veins
when christ ascended , in the time of birth
and like a cloud ’s his deep roar went
so munch on , crunch on , take your nuncheon ,
each man departed to his house again .
and all her manifold peoples at the blow
strength and security are flown ;
by timely flight his life may screen .
then down with pulpit , down with priest ,
running quicksilver - like eludes your pains ;
and natheles his lord hath take
of friends forgetful , ' twas my plot
created noblest , light'ning fall from heaven :
corn - fields . the sportsman trains himself , dresses , and watches
a mighty army , thronging all the roads
what canon says i may n’t
my watch is his delight ;
nor the winter 's icy air ;
but , you want no human aid--
into the golden vessel of great song
so rush'd the waves with wind - propelling power
the eagle of his nest
to annoy , or taunt , or torture .
it comes , it comes , o'er cities , temples , towers ;
to the soft thrill
wait ye in patience : time will bring relief .
a wondrous song sings she .
not made of ale , but spiced wine ,
which to our hearts this sabbath - day was given ,
out thro ' thy cell .
now see her coming down the hill !
when first the morning broke upon the hills ,
“ as all the cyclops ' power of voice could raise .
than ever india knew,--
that grieves , she sang .   that lay — soft , weirdly clear ,
woes -- of which woes so large a part was thine ;
turns to sorrow , shame , and pain .
she said :   but at the happy word ' he lives '
you are not satisfied with these
the music of the woodland depths , a hymn
and the damned grotesques made arabesques ,
through mortal toil and tears .
time who affliction bore on rapid wing ,
the darkened age 's last remaining light !
so many splendours , that i thought each light
heap flowers at its feet .
god 's world                   edna st . vincent millay
and each effulgence , foremost flashed forth ,
the first , a kiss too courteous to be kind ,
i saw , alas ! some dread event impend ,
" nushka ! you shall have a sweetheart ,
till her tears rose up beneath his smile .
to yive ensample to the goode
to my true love frae me . "
and burnt his mouth
i watched the snow ,
flocked back about the heroic house ,
then m'ginnis murmured , sleeping ,
glide about the many chambers ,
a little space on a stony hill
the immortal gift in vain libations .
on the waters of the ingern ,
the salvage ships will hurry out , two thousand wrecks to find ,
when brummel , the historic beau ,
of rest we used to know .
but i hae ane will tak ' my part ,
even while they brought the burden to a close ,
up high and smile
true opener of mine eyes , prime angel blest ,
and you 're all a - shakin ' like you ' ad the chills ;
with which she ever graced ye , -- old or new , --
with heavy stars that love us , love ,
to blot the sunshine of exultant years ?
i 'd go back there , no never ;
a spirit sick with perfume and sweet night
a country full of rivers
personally supervised the early education of his son . the young
but it could not break the meshes
there has been not the slightest attempt to " modernise "
stern as the face of war , and yet serene ,   }
characteristic of the mountainous country of thessaly , where she
voltaire 's gay sarcasm seems a smile serene,--
and now to tell thee -- what i fear
mature that blessed hour , when thou with god
yes , and back again .
taffy was n't at home ,
the candles on the altar blazed ,
and meek as the matron in mantle of gray ,
the crown , and sceptre , and the signs of state ,
some envy her spouse , and some covet her filly ,
the blood in rushing torrents welled ,
that in a ring
' what need have i to long or fear ? now , friendly , i behold
--say , then , he lived and died
which to our eyes in mirrors do appear ,
an ' the devil send 'em all they want o ' loot !
and ignorance , more dark than night ,
without an invitation to intrude
wielder of a shepherd 's crook ,
therefore , though better lips ye shall not lack ,
his shrapnel helmet set atilt ,
he looked at me , and opened with his hands
and some make mouths at dragons , undismayed .
and shook as i saw some horse - shoes crawling
and who so but begins the same to reade
there 's neither cauld nor care , jean ,
and courteously saluted the lords of burgundy .
and it soon will blow us home to the old countrie .
but he met 'em with a " how'dy ! " at th ' door ;
they sought the grecians , ardent to begin :
note xxii .
and , underneath our heavy eyelids drooping ,
i liken his grace to an acorned hog .
choose one dream and guide its flight !
our lips for awhile ,
that they are only " playing the party game , "
as through the glen it rambles ,
age clenched his staff , and maiden eyes
about this stranger with the clever tongue ,
ghostly in camden , there i sit in it and watch my hand grow old
from all the vanguard rose .
wherefore , meriones , hast thou the field
calm and still -- the heart enjoys rest .
death and burial of poor cock robin
were painted hideous animals ,
-- that force exceeding every force beside --
says ' tain ' no better ' n ' arf - strainer ;
to the virgine , and in the weie ,
then iagoo , the great boaster ,
songs of triumph , and ascriptions ,
she lifted her face to the sky .
with ripening cornfields waving wide .
in innocence or wisdom -- for who knows ?
for thee he died -- for thee he lives again :
" let me now have filled / coffers twice times ten
if she feels the lop already
mother and maiden
whene'er with haggard eyes i view
prithee , saint valentine , tell me here ,
hunger cries , ` ye starve : '   away !
vanished away like a fleet cloud of smoke !
" o justly loved , and not more fair than wise !
" now all that once were mine are flown
my fellow - voyagers , however worn
number , and stronger , and they were more skilled in the art of
so the painter fashions a picture strong
all the manitos of mischief ,
and if she 's not gone
then stole away , when that most dreadful night
so the pale silver at the festive board
with lights and cheerful fires renew the day ,
sonnet :   " i said i splendidly loved you ; it 's not true "
some hung the head , while some did bring ,
the two men are fighting ,
called to him telemachus , and the neatherd , and the
injurious to the main interest of the play .
he crept up to the chimney pot ,
and i thought that they crossed should be . "
and what do you think was in them then ,
and her heart a moment knew
something there is moves me to love , and i
and both of them shew marvellous courage ;
dooms to full vengeance all the offending train ) ;
full of the breath of the lord , consoling and comforting many .
that drink the deaw of life , whose deathlesse spring ,
and left him here , an outcast criminal ,
and gessler looked some haughty looks
and various animals his sides surround ;
because the turks could never be persuaded
a human form with human aim .
keep my course from going wrong .
_ heftit _ , familiarised to a place .
" thus over hills and heath
the body of judas iscariot
awake , three thousand miles away
touch not that ring ; ' twas his , the sire
grow , grow !
again he seeks a shining mark ;
what have you to say
with cheerful welcome , here caress'd , they stay
to bring you nothing but bad news .
not been transmitted to us . he is introduced in boccaccio 's
home .   entering the door , our ears were greeted
there 's not a rock that fronts the sea ,
you might use every legitimate endeavour
but when compar'd with real passion ,
fair sojourn . there are souls here on the right apart ; if thou
and dolorous gnashings and groans .
the less , or greater , set so justly true ,
as blood that 's spilt on snaw .
that not a saracen their cry shall hear ;
he dies ( if e'er by us he 's gain'd )
that love would prove so hard a master .
with trophies , rhymes , and scutcheons of renown ,
oh , fraud that can not cheat the bee ,
connected the poem with the tale by which it was first
puts out , and jesus from the ground suspires .
" beneath this sky , so livid and strange ,
o'er meadow , muir , and stripe .
and snorting through the angry spray ,
augustine        about six hundred years a.d .
" no , " answered molly , firmly .   " i have always had indistinct
lleve su tierno llanto ,
and the wind swept by with a wistful moan ;
and mounts o'er unknown seas with vent'rous wings ;
but not on hosts that march by harold 's side ,
and the joy you felt when she smiled once
then rich in hope , with faith sincere ,
is caused upon loves reule
the unadornèd yoke that brings
while pity went before ;
for favour ventures or a suit to win ,
when two true togeder had tyȝed hem seluen ,
a day of death the stormy future brings ;
tops of wild - carrots drying gray ;
that bars his purpose , like a cannon - ball ?
ere to the arduous pass thou dost confide me .
are not more dark , where plunged loud floods
ay , and we are all , too , marchaunt adventurers ,
heard i ewes bleat
dim rites unto the thunder and the sun ;
" the spotless fair , with blush ethereal warm ,
when drops with welcome rain the april day ,
we dared together and lost , by magnus ' blood
the way is fraught with dangers
heard above a world of crime ,
for sure the enchanted waters run through every wind that blows .
a bond - slave , will not need a sword to draw
our friends come in to tea .
a prone and expiring giant lifts up his bulk once more and
will guard the feet of ráma there ,
intolerable consanguinity .
she swept past in her gentleness again ,
and vow'd for my love , he was dying ;
the snowy army rolling knoll on knoll
or lamech , out of ages lost , --
schal ben enoignt and seintefied ,
i wore a heart of trust ,
neue inde nauis inchoandi exordium
they hunted her along the sea ,
lucia .         oh , yes ! at night you are sleeping !
he wanders from chamber to chamber , and yet
though he came from your native place ? "
and that by day for thee i pray , and weep on bended knee ,
in the shadow of the wood ,
unmeaning joys enervate in the end .
i knew how the clouds arise
and the dust of the grinded grain ,
throughout that brave mosaic yard ,
do n't you think it a pity , and greatly to be deplored
blue silk my robe , and not a tiger 's skin ,
have smitten the rod from royal hands ,
apart from every earthly fear and ill ;
they kenna the happiness dwalt in my bosom ,
the different doom our fates assign .
and the fertile soil there
and my hiawatha answered
eat and rejoice , and when ye shall have shared
o , gear will buy me rigs o ' land ,
you amazing old man on the humber ! "
the world should listen then , as i am listening now !
in the light of common sense ;
hung his masonry pendant on naught , when the world he created .
hypsipyle beguil'd , a virgin young ,
into the wonderful world .
and would have spoken , but the shade began ,
ere he got within ilius ; you have robbed me of great glory and
of pride and power , until there lay the dead--
" the second tells us what is right
might hold this charge of standing with a sword
of health ; from 1884 to 1889 he was prime minister . a consistent
inner parts were visible , and the dismal sack that makes ordure
have done my credit in this world much wrong :
i rather pitch'd upon the wrong note .
not to the lute or harp ,
because he was himself afraid .
just opposite , sad nilus opens wide
without one leaf of laurel for your brow .
a swelling cloud hung hov'ring o'er their head :
some one of the immortals had come down from starry heaven to
each wave , that we danced on at morning , ebbs from us ,
the more of sorrow ! "
he saw young ellen 's cot .
for , youth , the spell was only thine ,
gloriously drunk and happy , till they heard the roosters crow --
is a ' my worldly gear ;
of eight good knights the limbs he ’s broke ,
and thou dost keep in perfect peace
the decanters or glasses , the sweetmeats or fruits ,
now , for the holidays of life are few ;
pan dropt a tear , he hung his head ,
before this khara injure thee .
with the whole world tuned to kindness ,
of those four luminaries on his face
the printless beach , all combed and shining ,
the king of men his hardy host inspires
chains .   a play in four acts .
i dare not think upon thy vow ,
" oh , sir , " said i , " i do not wish to see you come to harm ;
imprisoning me in swoon of soft caresses
our greater muse may claim ) the pious ghost
the door of the study was half open , and simeon sat at his desk
yet a modern reader , without accepting the conclusions of his
strange art and dire ,
great nature is an army gay ,
a mockery , a delusion ; and my breath
there as here , my lovely aino . "
and poisons the blossoms of virtue around ,
onto her , fo ' sho ;
and never a word to say ;
i believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of
' put up quickly all your banners ,
i swing to the tree - tops ,
makth to his poeple riht good chiere ;
the clouds which rise with thunder slake
low the little brooklet 's cry ;
the helpful art of memory :
" woe to thee ! o wainamoinen !
like the honey - gem of glory ,
bot , " he is riche and wel bego ,
your bond is cancelled .
we harbour them , when hither they resort .
and the long melody of such large hymns ,
mine 's but a prey to erinnyes clamorous .
but should i , swimming , trace the coast in search
have made thee prosperous in thy ways thus far :
of breathing creatures bears and blooms , and that
would you know the reason why ?
to cause one pang of grief ;
and steady bliss , and all the loves
or view the untrodden solitude ,
i am seized , and bound , and delivered--
before the moon is risen ,
all else but this ,
here is his shadow furious .   there above
prahasta joined his palms and said :
but yf thou do not as thou hest sayde ,
pursued its course , now gleaming , and now hiding
but you 'll never judge me by their treason
_ vigil _ , watchman .
' fare thee well , for now i know
stay on the bank and o'er the waters bend
and,—for he loves his offspring,—he
nonconductors , as air , glass , silk , resin , sulphur .
which i shall never see ; for other eyes
unsightly a scrawl as betty byre - mucker 's answer to it ; i hope ,
o , o my snow - bird !
among those pearls came forward , that it might
at pleasure all her beauties yet unseen :
which is solomon 's :   " o my dove , that art in the clefts of the
over the slippery paths , and soon amid
will tell of the other things that i have seen there . i can not
sohrab come forth , and eyed him as he came .
my fairest child , i have no song to give you ;
i answered him , " i lost me in a valley ,
understood
they 're once again conduced , and we freed from the evil
how i did feel .   that emperor , who sways
they say exercitus designs
but some way leans and hearkens to the kind ;
and on the pedestal these words appear :
eke to a staff he fastened / a banner , red of hue .
of a parent so kind and so just ;
in running in as out , no sense of crime
was the bright sun , slantwise
to count them all , demands a thousand tongues ,
the victim falls ; they strip the smoking hide ,
to a friend , be that friend hatim - tai .
our known disasters fill ev'n foreign lands :
some solace of our loss might then be ours . "
and flung them into dungeons : there they lie
whose hues outshone the day .
fair play , he cared na deils a boddle .
already have my people shown their worth ,
bold lover , never , never canst thou kiss ,
' twas this that siegfried brought me from where by you he lay . "
she ran upon no rock .
instinctively , she laid on its cold feet ,
the kings whom you entreated so hard in years gone by .
and he donned an iron mail - coat ,
confirmation of my speculations , and the substance of my
when night o'er all the rest hangs chill and dim .
deep in the silver stream ,
but on each hand the tall cliff presses close .
underneath its misty blanket ;
and drake , whose rich imagination craved
such is th ' acquittance render'd back of him ,
bar the doors against the stranger . "
thus issu'd from that troop , where dido ranks ,
is of a harsher sound , as thou shalt hear
per gentis italas hominum quae clara clueret,--
if _ john _ had laid his schemes aside ,   }
he raised , and memnon in all love he pledged
to see the bit tailor come skippin ' again .
for thrice three nights to lye with any man ,
whose face , too , was familiar to his view .
ye that have eyes for all man 's agony ,
on the broad prospect of the level main
and the " orders " are " fall in , my men ,
what each can do , what each can never do ;
' the ground whereon this abbey stands
lightly spring across the hedges :
she pauseth ; and as each great mirror swings
gray lay the still sea ;
and thus his maidehiede he boghte .
how virgil gaz'd with wonder upon him ,
declared she would n't _ think _ of going _ there_--
is but a babe in wisdom , when compared
_ gyges ' ring _ , which made the wearer invisible .
for the fulness of these sorrows ,
far off then , in regions eastward ,
from peter 's shadow what may we not hope ,
within the narrow entrance , which for him
with thee , and then it stirs alert ,
making the wintry world appear
high , high above the rest -- to all cut off before their time ,
the date , and manner of the shame ;
he set -- the sportsmen from behind ,
things which in hungry mortals ' eyes find favour ,
is moored and altered quite
to my sage counsel therefore did i turn .
of amy robsart , wife of leicester , wife
do not desert me , " said i , " thus undone ;
una lágrima vierta el peregrino .
and the sky shows that very ancient gray ,
charms worth a prince 's dower
and now , minister loved ,
then bharat thus his chief addressed :
' listen , o mighty masters of the world ,
i bin watchin ' you , big jim ,
and there were people coming from the sallows ,
( ll . 2600 - 2620 ) thus did they , and the elder daughter went in
to those we 've left behind us !
or perched and twittering on the tendril slim ;
not once sir gawaine lifts his leaden eyes ,
now i make known      my noble descent ;
for ten long years wrought twenty thousand men ,
and thou shalt bear this written in thy soul
shine forth the children of the king
where the passer - by
" with equal love i love each child of mine ! "
then reconnoitring how they were dispos'd ,
then , to be whistled to by kings !
and strong and tall , with lifted eyes
a radiant childish crew ,
iam durum imperiis : abi ,
next morning is ringing with birds that are singing
however he toil there , to thrive in such ground .
" sous la feuille , sous la feuille , meet . "
nor them their faire and blooming youthe .
on nameless sorrow 's churchyard pillow .
balow , la - low !
and see me struggling in the depth
draw from her breast your milk , nor weep the high
lift in christ 's name his cross against the sword !
olindro he , the lord of lungavilla ,
to the north betaking myself to sing there arctic songs ,
lord guelpho answered thus : " what heart can bear
whose force with rival forces to oppose ,
the bells went wild , and the black smoke piled
and reeling limbs , and reeking flank ,
but euryclea , with dispatchful care ,
the wrecks of matter , and the crush of worlds .
and steadily the millstone hums
incense thick in the air ,
trembles and dives ,
me , dropping pebbles in the quiet wave ,
gossip , suppose the sun goes out like this .
they creep from out the hedges of
upon awakened worlds to shine .
did rest the tired eye .
whilst thus i sing , i am a king ,
i saw the giant stalking to the sky ,
of judgment , lord , to us be merciful !
and stables shutting in a stone - paved yard :
and fix that picture in my sleeve ?
he stood , and moved not , like a marble rock ;
spread its blue sheet that flashed with many an oar ,
“ of favorite with the gloomy bird of night .
one tyme the hawkys bellys jenglyth hye
the priests with claws , the lovers with hooves ,
what it will do when it is man .
i had given , and lain down for you , glad and dead .
follow fast his darts ere long .
when she who wedded with the soldier hides
drowned sharp edges beneath her cloak .
the magic swung my universe .
till , chilled with cold , they shade th ' ethereal plain ,
the lithe paullinia 's verdant fold ,
when he came to her father 's ,
he knoweth when to send thee quick relief ;
bemocks the seer with idle shows of many fearful things .
the lapidary knoweth nought
and strack ' gainst his side as if bursting in twa .
for divers follies yearning ,
home and his own country . '
and talk among the rustling of the reeds ,
now would the student leave his school , and play
hunger and thirst unknown to thee ,
to learn strange arts , and join a gipsy - tribe ;
who journeys , or to noli low descends ,
therefore , for the gods know everything , which of the immortals
and round on all sides sent his piercing view .
a smoky flash of incredulity
how oft he wish'd a place among the dead !
she twined him a wreath of the flowers blue :
of ne'er disturbed ether : for the rest ,
m'gill has wrought us meikle wae ,
but the eggs of hens ate never ,
" and _ poitiers _ lately , may be sure
to lay them in ?
it lent a new zest to the summer hours ,
ye flowery fells , and sunny braes ,
had smashed the cellar pane :
the sky shall be bright , and the bower shall be green ,
that leads to thibet , but to - day is gone
so many years these shoulders , bent and weak ,
may the dreams , may the dreams of ambition be o'er ,
and up she rose at height to leap from shore .
warning to the other maratyne countries . _ ]
answer in the words which follow :
with a glamour all her own .
dropped sudden as a perfect fruit ;
she gave her hand , then suffered wrong ;
as one might be who stabs and turns the knife
yourselves in slaying him slay .
and long the latest of arrivals halts ,
to whose soft measures lightly move
were hurl'd .   with ireful gestures , " who is this , "
as fresh as phenix young under th ’ arabian morn .
the hand of our god has outspread ,
counsel , shall put it into my heart , i will nod to thee
i named her traitress , serpent , o'er and o'er ,
for the mower 's work is done ,
dark are his eyes as is the veiled splendor
and sometimes save you from a prison 's gloom .
the man had fallen , that place of fear !
nah tha’ll hev trubbles , ned , ta bear ,
_ siebel _ . do n't say that thing again , you fretter !
" well i perceive the love thou showest me ;
when all the youthful splendor bright ,
has left its stain of wine .
" as first he stood , in chainless majesty ,
its sanguine heat .
if -- as each tree , and rock , and cave of old ,
then said to me : " he doth himself accuse ;
and these words the gray - beard uttered :
o son ; nor had mezentius erst , the tyrant neighbour lord ,
to feel another 's guilt !
his ears , they hear not what the blackbird sings .
so back they went to the convent gate ,
lust of conflict , heat of crime .
kiss thy soft cheeks ' blooming tinge ;
frost - white .   she gave his hearing sight to view
the aesopus , so she went close up to him and said , " brave son of
who durst depart from aristotle 's rules . ]
that he is absurdly jealous
and all his words i keep
call my spirit from this stormy world ?
but who for men of nought would do great deeds ?
that he is like the meek and lowly son
and failed . nay , what are words?--he knows it well
on the other hand , i am free to admit
than i will wrong such honorable men .
and took fourpence home to my wife .
they heaved and roared .
they 'll use us then they care not how--
to mery london , my most kyndly nurse,{29 }
my heart it gae a stoun .
jesus -- whom they in mock'ry call their king--
the lean grimalkin , who , since night began ,
who am bond and captive here ;
from a distant fold came a bleat of wethers .
let the swift world pass us ,
like a dreamy lotus bud
then tuneful robinson , and tofts were known ;
or with the shrill seagull to the breakers bend ,
of her , and her uncertain arts .
or a harem of dusky beauties , fifty tied in a string ?
  this poem was doubtless a product of freneau 's earlier muse , as
whilst other wight in rest and sleep sojourneth .
and us from bondage did redeem .
goldsmith 's lapse of ' luke ' for george . in the book which he
and ever flaunt their gay attire
for the fair girl i fight not ( since you choose
thumb extended , finger uplifted , apron , cape , gloves , strap ,
i used to wonder why the mice were blind ,
of tenfold adamant , his ample shield
nail'd haply to th ' accursed tree ,
of thee hereafter.--ev'n amidst my strain
( as is the course of rash and fiery men )
yit hadde i nevere such matiere ,
tu - lik'ki ( tuullk'ki ) .    one of the daughters of tapio .
all down the aisled place ; and beneath all
der so oft den roten hahn
so when prometheus braved the thunderer 's ire ,
then up rose sad sir launcelot
shall a ready answer make us .
" yet , when my walls were left
a saucy , joyous blackbird
until alas ! there comes a burst
lo ! manhood is come .
while i wash de clo'es , you know ,
" yonder he goes . we 'll have him now , "
unconscious echo of that vigorous sense and nervous speech , which
whither she went , and crossing o'er thereby ,
snowy clouds on - rush ,
unlike these seats of ours,--even subtle too ,
for all that they be fashioned fair .
and when he smote the earth , though with his terrible
with their great bridegroom , who accepts each vow ,
there was a king , right stately ,
shaped and fashioned it with figures ;
while momus , who used of the gods to make fun ,
" i surrender , _ but do n't duck me _ , "
where the boughs , with leaves a - devil's - dance ,
with love 's first flame to glow : " brother ! our will
could no longer charge , and could neither spring forward to
and as they listened every one
to pipe on the genius of hackfall 's old sandal .
of the _ standard _ to say what _ this _ portends .
to those whose admiration shall succeed ,
but out spake gentle henry--"no frenchman is my foe :
dark frowned the future e'en on him ,
and climbing up the iron sky ,
like day - light o'er a sea of blue ,
and stung by fury , griped his trenchant blade .
of space ,
_ gowk _ , term of contempt , the cuckoo .
laid aside the veils all silken ;
for great king herod used to tread the same ,
my father pressed my hand--
bright as the god o’er gods who reigns .
that made him sorry for me , and he smiled .
" something you just now said . "
but now the moors , arabians , ethiops black ,
never see him blue or pouting
swift o'er the lee when the wind flies free ,
in sanguine death that stains the sky
m'associates onely are divine .
where mind is king , and fashion is naught ,
on the meadows of wainola ,
when love is liberty and nature law . "
nothing bides nothing : that which is shall be ;
hie in haste to join the bridegroom ,
whither have danced those damsels now !
a statue of psyche and her lover , eros .
i had rather , by far , i had broken both legs ,
the kitchen ; the housewife sprinkling the clothes for the fine
neither raiment nor aught else that is the due of a hapless
that the feeble hands and helpless ,
where achilles ' murderous blade is heaping
not unperplexed nor free from pain ,
he hid them all from thee . "
we ' ad the darnce .   an ' , spite uv all begg 's fears ,
but empty ; for his wife , for nanna came
you pitied his weakness , you struggled to save him ,
ever it skulks and trembles with the hunter , death , on its track .
presumptuous laocoon .   shame it were
whose inmost heart is pain ,
long given encouragement to the suitors . the only defence set up
expect thy dog , thy bottle , and thy wife ,
o prime enlightener ! thou who crav'st me strength
the river on whose bosom we were borne
and lonely , as a lonely stone .
but as he might have risen in old days
and fifty fathom deep
courage , husband , we shall vanquish ,
i sigh not over vanished years ,
do n't be too wise , and be an ape:--
tell em to share t’moast brass to t’poor ,
have here twelve comrades only ; thus will i guard your land .
of any rank dissevering man from man .
he 's a growler , he 's a growser , he 's a nuisance , he 's a bum ,
" lord god , " he cried aloud , " they 'll light our road
riding the resonant rail ;
has reached its middle , we have far to go :
as it is , he loves and protects her ,
an ' i am here the same , ladie .
to conciliate fortune , and courage to brave
swell harshly on the southern winds which melt along our sky ;
to stay their overthrow ;
i fear , through her devices we all shall soon lie dead . "
descends for ever , fitting ' twere to find
this present , thou forsooth , wouldst fain arrest :
` sweetheart , sweetheart , sweetheart , '
the melting tenderness of night .
but have now made the whole wide world their home ,
the chamber walls are cracked and bare;--
speaking of the past unto the present ,
she bound her hair with a band of blue ,
desirous to correct , not knowing how :
now saltbush bill was a drover tough , as ever the country knew ,
not their engines , do the puffing .
his eyes from off his navel 's mystic knot .
so ' twas done as he had ordered .
with the tender light for the tender hour ,
if he shall ever be the duke of stratford .
high up on the lonely mountains ,
ever - varying beauty of the glittering silver rain !
he loves their opposite : and there is he ,
to aid my brother ’s government .
of that fair castell he got a sight ;
that make the ages young .
must slake the sword that cries , and still the ghost
see and not see , and if thou chance t'espy , i. 37 .
faulkner ! for once thou hast some judgment shown ,
forth with mischaunce , and ye your - self , in ioye ,
so , piercing through the dense and darksome air ,
the morning foreign shone , --
and mine as man , who feel for all mankind .
or by the braken howe far down the glen ,
filled the evening star with music ,
eclipse and suff'rings burnish majesty ,
the sweetest robes by woman wrought
the long feared fatal hour draws near,--
staunch friend and noble foeman ;
cause enough for bitter sorrow .
doth not retract a single spice
thus ar these wretchyd caytyfes fully blynde
and perfect witness of all - judging jove ;
“ upon the altar , plac'd without the gates :
" let but the noble frenzy seize the brain ,
" seemed then not sufficient / the havoc unto you
give me these and i will pay ,
my love is hard to find
ah let me seek it from the raging seas :
these from the tomb with clenched grasp shall rise ,
into the heart of passion 's another fire - born day .
dance a baby
for weel i lo'ed prince charlie .
along by the groves where his ing'borg bideth .
_ good seed in the field . _
while in despair on the shore evangeline stood with her father .
god 's altar - vow she swore me
nerves are in a cursed state . i feel that horrid hypochondria
here , where all europe with amazement saw
down to the shallow vale below ,
beneath the " starry banner of the free , "
that you may keep th ' unerring line ,
where about the graves of the martyrs the whaups are crying ,
the things that lack some other qualities .
ma - ry , ma - ry , quite con - tra - ry
a sound must long remain ;
" friend , unto whom i soon am to owe so kindly a fortune ,
alas ! it is my husband , fainting , bruised ,
believe me nymphs , believe my hoary hairs ,
below them .   ah , the autumn day
thou art calm and so am i.
i never had been thought a known witch .
and leve the hilles hee ,
he shall this silver - studded sword receive ,
o king , i have a word to thee ;
say , whence is the voice that when anger is burning ,
a waking eye , a prying mind ,
with feet that make no sound upon the floors .
like holy david , he
and engraver , and then we 'll wake up the boy ( who
i am welth of this realme looke upon me
and saw a closed white lily
who failed to appreciate me ; —
have left our heavens clear in pale ,
was obvious in each feature of her face ,
april again ! with its wonder of gladness ,
spare for thy children , for they bribe not me .
have stolen or devoured their prey ,
" where all shall see her naked skin . . . "
full closely to the fire she drew ;
looking back to joy once more ,
with joy approach , o christian wight !
with mutton bones was the basket filled ,
' so he spake , but i answered him : " achilles , son of peleus ,
to honour -- none knows why ; for all the woes
the time for toil is past , and night has come--
yes , i would be a happy gem ,
one bird , anguish stricken , lingers
mortals!!!"--o doctrine ! comfortable and healing to the weary ,
gumlie , muddy .
and whigs to hell did flee , man .
my heart flows like a sea ,
siste viator , in this storied urn
" to whom with tears : ' these rites , o mournful shade ,
nor waited long . the god of day
on him whose senses woe has dazed ,
in the rebellious days of yore ,
clearest dew , heaven 's drop for me ,
your life would ever be one with mine ,
the earth revolves with me , yet makes no motion ,
saloonward they are flocking !
of the elder dead .
poured by the infinite heaven of my heart ,
so , with her fingers frail , she pressed my brows , and so ,
these particulars i had from the author 's son , bishop skinner , at
to yield her hart to such deceitfull battrie :
from some still shadow in her hair .
virokannas , _ used as a proper name ; apparently meaning the wise
o if i vonce could find de vay ,
speaking so that they made the going of no cost to me ; and ho ! a
the feasts are doubled , and the bowls go round .
to arms , though humbled by the scourge of jove .
the music of lucretius is altogether his own . as he was the first
is all on his play - business bent ,
an ' there he 'd sit until he rose , an ' , when he rose , he wore
of expiation for the old year 's ill ,
“ come out unto the castle yard . ”
with woe _ not love 's _ , shall glass thee everywhere
i will take a torch and set you afire ,
the bird 's nest
once he read in smoke - cloud signals ,
how elfinhart at last told what she wanted ,
sweet as the dawn - wind over the downs
thus dost thou seek to sit the sacred steed ?
what strange guests has minnehaha ? "
what one thinks one is , or thinks that others suppose one ;
and just as fond of cake and fruit ;
multitude - echoes from bird and bird,--
and in they rushed -- too late -- too late -- to see the good man die .
for welcome - shot prepared :
such sorrow in his heart as his faint tongue
and mourn their colma as they 'd mourn a friend .
for ye ay shall mak the bed to me . "
in fair review before king agramant ,
in the blessings of to - day ,
than see that gentle damsel not his own .
that which distinguished the gender
the good enchantress can discover all
where are they that begat thee ? '
thus who that procuryth great honour to attayne
and o'er the buried virgins ' virgin dust
i feel it in my shell . "
yes ! even i was in arcadia born ,
of elfin chivalry , that , helmed with gold ,
to mar no more the exercise devout
first bowed beneath the brunt of hellas ' sword ,
time is our tedious song should here have ending ;
a fair white stone will mark this morn —
and hurrah for the country again .
that swom on his wandering sight .
on the young heather , and away ,
ye fools of fate ?
_ over _ ; but _ in _ ? the world is full ;
when he comes riding from the south ? _
sees nought but sadness in the character
the few short hours of human joy ,
“ their hearts were mov'd , and thus a trojan bark
from whom all other argives shrank in fear .
were any wild poet to praise .
the wrench that sets us free
to the right shoulder - joint the spear applied ,
but cold december dwelleth in her heart :
in the snow beheld no footprints ,
no seeing ere the lights of eyes were born ,
that men may admire , when future suns
and died to give him , orphan'd in his birth !
such notes as , warbled to the string ,
neglect the gods who on olympus dwell ;
and the guests of hiawatha ,
that my shelves were dismantled , my cellars unstor'd ,
eram , jessides .
  the more popular words to the same tune and chorus , beginning ,
claim the thrones she brings to birth .
built of clay and hair of horses ,
printed for thomas j. wise , hampstead , n.w .
of course the cost of living has gone soaring to the sky
“ mad though he rag'd with ire and famine both ,
obsairve .   per annum we 'll have here two thousand souls aboard --
and owns its offspring in their yellow eyes .
fair folk are in my father 's hall ,
as her sire a chief had been ,
and those languid moon - washed summer nights
that furnish thee sport ,
when i had to tell you i was " broke " ?
and praise the forefeet , that with furious ramp
spread out on massy bucklers ; good store thereof had he .
i 've seen yon weary winter - sun
_ appius . _ e'en to the letter ?
i pray ye flog them upon all occasions ,
dona pacem , domine ,
not looking as he did before ,            }
on kingston bridge .
but o there ’s a charm , and a charm fer me only ,
somewhat extravagant and wild , perhaps
and when the thief peeps down , the thief
says a wag to a porter e haworth one day ,
follows him as he commands loads good merchandise . but his flock
lose half their value .   tell me of your dream .
down to the very fountain where he lies .
and so is love and the spinning wheel ,
ere yet was lost the art divine ;
this was the turning of the tide ;
don c.   his cousin violante .
and this was only the song of the bell .
their deerest chrystals of vnualued price ,
so stood the pious prince , unmov'd , and long
good - bye , my friends , for now , i really think ,
a messenger of hope comes every night to me ,
anything alters in any one 's trade . _
understanding . wordsworth is simply a solitary who has long gazed
they think how beautiful their courtships were .
soon as each babe was twelve days old
could she breathe the breath of ukko ! "
master unjust ! but not because i choose it .
a duffer i have lived and died
( epics tingled
active within beyond the sense of brute .
the place was dark , unfurnitured , and mean;--
sky above and sky below ,
the ship has weathered every rack , the prize we sought is won ,
the songs of one who strove to play
here is life ! here is youth ! here the poet 's world - wish,--
to hear once more their idol 's rippling song .
so liberal , so just is he .
for i'se feared i mought fail .
they could n't fetch the butter in the churn ,
or fear the snarling wolf - pack ? let them come !
let fall his eyelids , and lay limp and , to all
a fair , a freissh , a lusti on .
in himself , rev'renc'd , nor in me that cord ,
achilles lefte hise armes so
sche knette , and so hireself sche ladde ,
you did n't find a yellow lady 's slipper .
too fair , i may not call thee mine :
between the walls , that hem the region round ,
after my guide , impell'd ; and pity mov'd
they paused to view the garden fair
ulysses trembled in his knees and heart ,
have evermore been crucified and burned .
like dusk and dawn , they sat there face to face .
that the work was begun
and mankind , ignorant of future fate ,
to help our bleaker parts
phaëton , deaf to all their mournful cries .
gentleman in tights ,
out on the lovely sea ,
by the flame that left her dead old sins in ashes ,
" the fever waneth -- wend to bed ,
let others for the noble task prepare ,
magic maid of little stature ,
what didst thou sing of , thou embodied glee ?
the battle - slain . "   so hearkened he to them :
but shall be overtaken unaware .
mother sarah being dead ,
o friend of man , who cares for all ,
dear , you are like the summer dusk to me ,
wher him was wo , god and him - self it wiste !
and when the dusty column checks and tails ,
but never consider'd he liv'd by the trade ;
there those when , at my absence , whether he slept or waked ,
hinder from flight , and firm enough hold
and might cleanse himself completely .
lets loose
to wainola 's plains and pastures .
for when all things were dark , not a glimmer nor spark , and the
not rashness for a weapon -- too keen sword
where i fain would be !
the ladies of those days in summer 's prime
quoth that of all the kings of earth ,
love , the least of all their beauties .
on his pale brow the inexorable peace
for , doing most , there 's pretty sure to come
“ all else be thine . ” to him , as thus he begg'd ,
so as their begging now them failed quyte ,
was the reply : " and what forbade the smile
to a public which has sought them
she taught me to love her , i loved like a child ,
what song it was the sirens sang ,
an ' when the pickin 's on , i ' ave me ' an 's
shall our loss be turned to gain .
early in the morning ,
if he refuse , then let him timely weigh
but i thought of many a mother - bird screening her nestlings ,
maud burst in , while the earl was there ,
next brave deipyrus in dust was laid :
songs of love , then a bishop . he died in 1213 .
melodrama , was the white - muslin girl with the vassar mis - label .
one tear to memory given ,
for cold the neighbor sun .
of human life and love , of death , and heaven .
beneath my fierce , profane caress
lying crosswise in the entry ,
would drive her myriads from the field .
but lest you think i am uncivil ,
rhodora ! if the sages ask thee why
not the same smiling !
than triumph , turn away
shoals , bound for newbern and other places on palmico
and the shrubs attune their voices
near the herds of swine and cattle ,
sae comely to be seen"--
so noble and so bare .
show me thy face--
" ce petit prodige c'est moi qui l'ai fait . "
since i first beheld by moonlight ,
he said ; and then to us : ' no way is found
waves above her perfumed bed
hear his clear voice ring over the lea ;
how once , one glorious essence as a god ,
trooping all together ;
and round and round his left ,
thy straying thoughts henceforth for ever rest .
on with thy fortunes then , whate'er they be ;
as doth a lover 's feeblest song .
my life - destroying darts this day
and i , alas , have not a son
it dwelt in alba , up to those fell lists
and tortures him now more , the more he sees
and sat down to smoke and ponder .
clamorous for their morning banquet .
will creep underground
all was still , save by fits , when the eagle was yelling ,
  sandy , the french sable = sand.--_ed . _
as when his terrible dotage to repeat
if in the last , how many knots beside ,
' tis three o'clock , and time for you to dress .
whose influence tortured or consoled the most :
where they lay pent ,
full oft i told : at length for parting moved ;
the good and evil to discern .
but where 's the note , brave dog , like thine ?
of that goshawk and this -- signors in serge ,
they reach not that eternity
wherefore , well mantled with a veil , the knight
the oblique circle , which conveys the planets ,
springs eagerly , and faintly sinks , to where
in the forests of wainola ,
an ' we d 'em when they 've done with scraps ,
come , let me past and let me start ,
the sacred fillet . with his nobles walked
nor should i have made mention of this dell
that said , " it is thy brother sheemah 's voice . "
horace has sat with me whole mornings through :
he sits in bivouacke ,
whom wasting famine had made lean and spare ,
watching in pain a grabbing fellow ,
in the upshot greatly grieves him
bothe of himself and of his men
to stand as debtors in a tradesman 's book ;
that serveth not another 's will ;
pass back and forth before my brain ,
towards somewhere far away
till slain be the great one wrong ;
should fall to them in frisian land ;
he serves his mood now with man 's blood
and suddenly i turned and saw again
its floating fading memory seems one
in . and what believe ? ah , if i could believe !
and uniting with the hosts
then like a heavenly goddess shone
in such a cloud the god from combat driven ,
and near the edge , their menace
sir eger said , ' if it be so ,
but this he did all in the _ ease _ of his heart .
he the divine child
the lord will not despise .
con varoniles suspiros ,
" iguanodon,--mastodon,--man,--in their passing
i had the loneliness that sings .
then ráma , following still his guide ,
around their hearthstone boys and girls do swarm ,
over the broad earth 's canopy , and steals
which simply would have been embarrassing you see .
stands by the streams that wash the tuscan town ,
the roofs beneath her trees :
and saw , within the moonlight in his room ,
that arched o'er our first great sorrow ,
with tears and laughter for the dew - dropt thing ,
the grace and guard of britain 's golden lands .
arriv'd , where wond'rous thing engag'd my sight .
with complex potency attract and turn .
had rendered me importunate to know ,
long he would love her "      george etherege
and something shadowed the sunny face .
the first verse of a eanzone or song in the convito of dante ,
mould a bride from gold and silver ;
no sun can warm this spot
now i stand up no more ? "
nor could the pain i felt ( for want of breath
and he 'll woo his bonny lassie
my own inherited .
and bids that saint who now speaks welsh on high ,
with eager hands
and then eumelus had received the prize ,
a model for her virtue ?
draw close , as if with one consent ,
but could not prove it perfectly
and storms be none , and pyrates flee ,
but in just twenty minutes my sunday - school class
su adiós lastimero .
vigorous health and gay desires .
who among men was called steadfast and just . '
of him who all things can , i would not cease
dropped it into his musket , and yelling still louder ,
have heard hereof from your fathers , whosoever they be , for
among the indians he had fought ,
than sought to join us thus , " he had growled ; but now
and more than one shock of it had pulled out ,
before he climb the pass--
all your left feet out ,
and fair the feet of thy lover the spring :
were seated in the chariot , he
the lord of heaven allowed his cause ;
_ trig _ , spruce , neat .
our beetigs by the tedtder stars .
and baby shall play with a painted ball ,
himself heals their strife .
and then he lets poor sentiment go slide !
grew marble cold ; a pallor as of death
by this device he gains their arms and steeds ,
the grass , the sunlight , and the sun--
of things eternal , mounting to divine ,
and the swift - winging bark stood like a rock ;
stream near durham , his native country , his reverence reprimanded
in the cleared space he stood at last alone .
dialogue betwixt the author , and his friend , or monitor ;
wayteȝ gorsteȝ & greueȝ , if ani gomeȝ lyggeȝ ,
a wide grey level under the motionless sky
and , with thy mohawk death - song please our ear ?
and fixed her shrine within these walls of white :
“ and strength more great than such a body shews .
over the caliban sea ,
an adept , and with nothing to teach ,
pressit , gravavit , obruit
and morn a new politeness took ,
you stretch to pluck it--'tis a butterfly ;
turnd fierie red , sharpning in mooned hornes
with his lance in his hand , and two fleet dogs bare him
my little garden , my sweet one , protect it and do not let any
of her footprints round the cornfields .
endures the charm
through the dark night i keep humming , " she is i , despairing
to him who suffered at his side
then at a wave of her sunny hand
to mighty kuśa , king of earth .
hither through failure of their vow exil'd .
her pale body
the moon 's pure light is shining
¡ qué serena agonía ,
and chatted over several matters merrily .
god , when i turn the leaves of that dark book
when the numerous distempers to which all flesh is heir
oh ! where was tranquil reason now ,
sighing , has made a bed for his cheek with his hand . father
thou hast no sorrow in thy song ,
hang it with vair and purple dyes ;
his name was , i remember .   his reward
i come to thee once more , my god !
which kept itself a moment still
dream - drunk till evening , eyeing it .
unhand me , i say , unhand me ! "
november 's gusts unheeded call ;
crecy            the valiant french in crecy 's fray ;
while low aerial voices whisper round ,
and spends his pulse of life , but issues forth
" he is a tuscan born , of an old
firewood , but they spitted the inward meats , and held them in the
and above the broken sod ,
give day ; and ( since thy sovereign will is such )
fit to serve or do him sacrifice
and yet when i am extra good and say my prayers at night ,
on their hautboys , christmas songs !
two eyes she had beseeching me
" the best short stories " of the current season .
at night the front of the old chateau
he opens in splendor , with gladness and mirth ,
as , round the sleeping infant 's feet ,
and i marked not the charm in the changes of day
till valley and plain
for from the louer to the loued eie
these , these are ours for ever ,
with a chestnut braid , minerva - wise ,
stand where rome 's blood was freest shed ,
and why , my pretty lad , said she ?
“ to the deep water , on the ocean i ,
the gabiens : and al be nyhte
there ?
the chimney to a steeple grown ,
more fleet then clouds with liquid paces stray :
who , born too soon , was hanged withal .
athenæus , that they instituted games in his honour , which were
then keep this house first ! unto whom giv'st thou iulus ' life ,
" ` the reason i departed from thy side ,
who knows but he , whose hand the lightning forms ,
though tried by trouble never fail ,
secondly , that it is the mother of lies .
as when a light wind o'er the sea doth fly ,
mauseritis in his leg .
you make it plain that if so be _
their beakers crowning high with wine , they hail'd
started to rejoice ;
like bees around their hive in june .
of the goldenrod ;
were good small talk for others still less great)--
full - fed tarentum 's glades and distant fields ,
and joy and strength and courage are with thee ?
" and think thee safe , tho ' far away ,
fly ! and i placed her on the horse with me--
to the questions a figure of clay .
heaves under weed and flower ;
and nature grieves ,
the sad vicissitude of weary pain;--
or thus detect some poet 's " fist " and style
that she would nourish all her days , no doubt .
nods its purple plumes in pride ;
lurk there no hearts that throb with secret pain ,
destroyer of himself and of his things .
did she benign or evil lot endure .
no it ca n't be , you must be in a joke ,
nor use those palisades by dames erected ,
for shippes ashore beyond the scorpe ,
o heart of pure gold !   i have made you a fold ,
whan þi ri[gh]t a{nd } þi wow[gh ] wendiþ þe bi - for ,
a hero 's heart -- a sister 's love--
into her garden , and he spake to her :
the gaul is in his brain and nerve ;
he said : " i would inquire of thee ,
eagerness , thou grey - eyed goddess , i would war even with
to rot in the salt sea . '
a strain of the fur - trapper wary ,
bone - bleached my decks , wind - scoured to the graining ;
o then , indeed , her faint heart swelled for love ,
two mastiffs walked beside him . as he passed
lie prone , enormous , down the mountain side--
when eve was given for a mate ;
a youth had been challenged to sleep all night
or some cloud of sunny white,--
from the safe guard of shaft and bow
and leaving staring ruin in its way ?
of anthenor which he hath nome ,
he also had this ample heouse . "
and the dead leaves rustling as they fall :
sons to construct , and daughters to adorn
flags a - flying and armour tight ,
where a ship can lie . here then the achaeans placed themselves
hurt in that night of sudden ruin and wreck ,
beside the river which i long have loved .
he cursed him in living , he cursed him in dying!--
till the labor was completed .
if opposite aught there be
in loves cause of robberie
till next year brings it round again ,
whilst adam slept , eve from his side arose :
he finds it hard , without a pair
we sit vis - a - vis ,
the world was bright , and our hearts were young--
of yore , dione 's daughter   twining
what visions of a shrine of peace and rest !
your pangs or pleasures of fifteen
and mine arose as from a tomb .
before the thunder - peals . when all is fast ,
' o glance on these sad shades one pitying ray ,
then he sang softly nigh the pearly rim ;
and i will report all heroism from an american point of view .
the full and the moon 's dark and all the crescents ,
in 1910 mr . manning published , with the almost defunct and wholly
and harmless on the earth it lay ,
where one i love will shine supreme!--
when it is born ( by some enstyl'd
the arts , at least all such as could be said
imágenes de oro bullidoras ,
june 26 .           ' history of england , in a series of letters
for visual strength , refining more and more ,
ask if he 's got a message .   hell , he 's gone !
monotonously and sluggishly they crept upwards
remember that the son you bore the wrongs
as they approached their goal ,
money he took , and let them smoothly off ,
by rebel pachas , and encroaching giaours ,
as the great eagle
friend .
under stagnant roofs that frown .
at close of the year 's maple blush ,
on the smooth mountain sward , might here retire
he was son unto cappadocia 's king ,
if i shall wear that look of care when time has marched apace ?
trains of ideas must instantly be dissevered by the sudden
and thei here trowthes bothe plyhte ,
her soft touch on my cheek and forehead sent ,
" wake from the silence of thy fallen doom ,
was daunted with a dame . "
there must be laws or who could live ?
the few left who know where to find her--
and ay she shook the temper - pin .
the gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his perfect blood ,
she questioned him -- scarce heeding his replies--
once more thy strong maternal arms
he to the temple bears his sordid sails !
who of the first barefooted beggars were
forsooth with that selfsame beheading sword .
hitched up with eve who , chafing at the bit ,
need not trouble him at all .
the face of the grief of to - day .
“ were those his youth , his birth , and brilliant deeds
rank injustice stalks about ,
labour and rest , as day and night to men
into the valleys of the past ,
huge ceibas , whose trunks were scarred
the third day , finding him , would weep ,
" to bring my brave boy unto my arms ,
and i laughed when i saw him , in spite of myself ;
night falls as in some foreign clime ,
well they trotted and well they paced , and she took heed to
said the aged vaeinaemoeinen ,
the ganges ' shore and indus ' bank between !
radiant colors from heaven are beaming
had struck the girl 's heart dead in her ,
is richer than all earthly fame--
with mules and carriage for conveyance hence
nor nero , in his more luxurious rage ,
the gates all open'd wide , forth pour'd the crowd
resolution . his weakness he will show , yet also his strength ;
and the brave race that you spring from ,
that something so delectable that over yer will steal ;
for yet my name scarce sounds on rumour 's lip . "
anything more than the truth would have seemed too weak
vicit olimpia , nunc senio confectu ' quiescit .
ground .
in even motion , by the love impell'd ,
i must ever hear you wail ,
the darnedest picture of woe ,
when i a second time shall set my hand ,
but her!--expose her onywhere--
who studied with me at the u
to him ; put on , he 'll say , put on ,
old voices , old kisses , old songs
and through the walls , helter - skelter they pour ,
and our charges ' gainst " the leopard 's " rush clash .
for he hath a keen eagle eye ,
great of grass and huge of bole ,
just then she heard her aunt calling her , and she knew that some
be it not seen in either of our brows
or under quilt , one cometh not to fame ,
why ca n't they let him rest ?   why must they drag him
in alle haste , and seide hem tho
for though we 've no great bardling 's strain
and picking himself up without sign
siendo de la elocuencia el mayor río .
and , as the eyes grow dim with many years ,
yes --- once again with joy i find
hast not thy fill ?
one !   two !   three !   and my fingers sink in
and all degrees before the goddess bend ;
a mother 's wail
forbidding ; and at once with him they rose .
the great bell cracks and falls at last .
of the unfolding ages , i must doubt
no maid shall bind your hair ;
the mountainous wrack of a creation hurled .
who is as the christian great , 37 .
they then begin te feear an ' queeake ,
the weak brain may serve to amaze ,
a sceptred hand o'er space , and hold
the rosy - fingered morn with gladsome ray
for , as honest joe hume says , the " _ tottle _ " for me !
or a nest of young doves in a large open cage
he that they were bearing by ,
i am the queen of anakim .
no murmur waked the solemn still ,
he stirred ; we aped a phantom cheer .
he ' spied his ancient foe , by the moon 's light!--
hideous and terrifying
and y ' came straight t ' me , a larrikin ;
was he pining for the sea ?
a skeleton , nor fed on graveyard charms ,
and witness an heroic deed , bright gleam ' midst horrid sights .
" pearly drops of dew we drink . "--old song .
the mellow moonlight streams .
an ' loved like very brothers--
" inferior to the prelates in learning . "
you do not guess how tender is the night ,
when tidings came that salisbury ,
malgre nous vers le ciel il faut lever les yeux .
often i have heard it said
the harpies fly toward the torrid zone ;
damoetas ' praise of his daphnis
for brave dead soldiers , these :
as the ugly face that man has got .
your grandmother at whist .
go to , no more in endless leaguer of troy
  i have ventured to call it unique ; not only because i know no
dominated the whole group which listened to his advice
a serpent writhed across my pathway ; not
on horseback . through the whirling dust they steer
brydges , bart .                                              xliii
but just the pouchie put the neive in ,
below , their planted feet at distance fix’d ;
that god , who gave us country and language , and all ,
from john dowland 's _ third and last book of songs or airs _ , 1603 .
from wild and weak complaining ,
praise shall not pleasure thee then , nor pleasure laugh in thy
the evening stretches before me
she took me up in her milk - white hand ,
and yearning cries : let come thy kingdom ,
so scored with blood it was , and hewn
when , like a checquer they display
' if i have taken the common clay ' ,
i wake nex ' day , ' n ' holy smoke ! i 'm pri-
her other parent , too , whose head
the mavis mends her lay ,
fast closed , with folded arm - petals in vain
why wear ye this crown - royal upon shield ? '
supply , a supper from the last regale .
the angels came from heaven high ,
were wasted on their sight ,
" friend , " sighed he , " you come too late ,
highways of war , for lack of drivers who were lying on the plain ,
the latin throne should share , and rule from sea to sea .
riding home again .
shall it yield him bitter flavor ?
whose cards , in many a fair one 's sight
though he be led down shadowy pathways where
seems the stroking of a dear
an ' , for thy pains , thou'se get my blather . "
unbound of all these gyves , to stretch , to spurn
thou dost not break .   but lo ! a spirit there
he said , the greeks their joint assent declare ,
in the mouth of wise wipunen ,
her amber eyes
i feel the air beneath the wings ;
that our ancient liturgy may be restored ,
but they still knelt on , unheeding ,
that , glittering in the solar ray ,
bring the best of thy provisions ,
at being disappointed in your wish
to whom the angel . son of heav'n and earth ,
ours haunt lewd hops , and midnight masquerades !
instructive emblem of this mortal state !
no guile seduced , no force could violate ;
of the changeless story of heat and cold .
to this perceptible hath lifted thee . "
and step by step i gladly take--
aeneas to tell the whole story of his adventures ( 775 - 891 ) .
" see those stacks ? oh , yes , we have finished the haying !
oh , thou'lt confess that love from man to maid
and with that word sche loste speche
though ' twere already done ' twere all too slow ;
on such a night as this it were a sin
and from that scattered dust ,
blesser of races with believing blood ,
the rime that above human things and woes ,
on a summer night ,
published at rome in 1743 , with learned illustrations by giovanni
( and to - night the winds are a - coming from the west ) .
this winter of a silent poet 's heart
sensi relicta non bene parmula ,
hears the shouting of the heroes .
although it has but little strength ,
' by other ways , from other ports thou'lt fare ;
of feeble mortals ! nor of them alone !
it only shows us where we strayed :
she comes ! she comes ! her banners dip
bade him mete out the treasure , / the full valorous man ,
in our inclement city ? what return
birds -- beasts of prey -- and wilder men appear ,
put in love , and put in too
" as idly there i lay alone he came
in august growing sultry as the sun
and one little teeny one ,
love they or hate they , strive or bow their knees--
in the rosiest light these sages
and sheds faint odours through the air :
does its last work .   one crowded hour is charged
still gathering force , it smokes ; and urged amain ,
obliquely on the little wheedler thrown ,
o sweet delight , o more than human bliss ,
i turn'd , i found the dean alone .
had been forth to see her we d ;
aloud because his feelings were too tender
upon a shoreless sea !
and pressed their lips upon her head .
the golden age is drawing nigh ,
did ape large liberty with such success
thy life should glide in peace along ,
of heaven appear'd to open for my flight ,
night ahead and -- where - away ?
and struggling to his feet ,
' tis down by the lake where the wild tree fringes its sides ,
thus drawn to obey you ?   what are you , lucile ? "
to special faith .   whence in the lesser circle ,
i 'm for an _ act _ , that he , who sev'n whole years
leap’d from his chariot on the trembling ground ;
rearing on high , a mighty blow let fall
cruel fates have we to battle ,
i should have revolted forever , and shock'd
i wus afeard de devil ' ould ketch me
i drink in a dream--
what do the people say , and what does the government do?--you
shall honour due to me be shown .
sees its colours depart :
unto god .   their folly and the angel 's pride deceived them .   they
and mingled by that second , foul from fair .
and there he sits alive , and gayly shakes
sword - men , it must be you ,
e'en as the breathing of the wind or wingèd thing of dreams .
faces there are that tremble ,
when i my rightful portion sought ,
keep us , oh keep us the many in one !
to death it bids defiance and to torture .
he that all the winter grapples
do songs of ' lavender ! ' rise clear
can be imagin'd . "   he in answer thus :
to face the foe , polydamas drew near ,
hushed in repose are beast and bird :
who knew , for years , the toils of bush - farm life .
and wipe the tears for ever from his eyes .
having striven to rend him in vain .
so sore a need came over me . for i too have a righteous
my father 's wife is old and harsh with years ,
distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears .
i 'll mebbe have to thole wi ' skink
in life and death now treads the stage again .
with wex , and if he toke his flyhte
beautiful yet thy temples rise ,
there lay in a vale ' twixt lone mountains
from john mundy 's _ songs and psalms _ , 1594 .
and took her seat beneath a canopy ,
are from their sockets beaten out -- o'erthrown
you can tell the love of jesus ,
the daughter of mendoza .
the world has secrets which no skill reveals .
half mad in arms a second match to find .
_ faust _ . but then she 's over fourteen years old .
unseen amid the throng : so violence
and all the flowers were mine .
him well he knew , how fit for his behoof ;
with softened glory , while the pasturage
that they might not hinder any of the crew in their rowing ,
to where on the far crystelline pale * of that transtellar heaven
straight to renew them ;
sternest of them all ?
this to her winged brother pallas lent
the biggest monitor
so much already there had we advanced
safe from the winds , secur'd by mountains high ,
to see them duly changed :
why should we then suspect or fear
to whom the guileful tempter thus reply'd .
whet your tongue
as if the schools design'd their terms of art ,
smiting the heathen horde,--
lest the maidens should deride .
the power of vision that your world receives ,
that the proud beasts him readily obayd :
for pan is dead but i am still alive ,
and in love enjoy it .
living only in dreams !
cheat him , devil -- if you can !
now from the snow - years ' mountain - side
and when my toil is blest
christina , ' twas shamefu'--aye was it !
" give me but thy sister , and the thing is done .
come unto us the peace of thy dominion ,
not the least gifted ; young ,
the nations greet her from their awful thrones .
who call'd to council all the achaian state ,
we lay thee with the dead ;
had plucked thy mourning flowers and wept thy timeless fall .
but through all lands of greece alcestis ' fame
they drew , constructed ladders , repair'd flaws
and low at ades ' feet , wrapped in grim murk
peeped from their buds , showed like the garden 's eyes
_ mephistopheles _ . no wonder .
and slow the hands that carry on ,
but come . we will attest the gods ; for they
but how did he return , this haughty brave ,
i do n't think he looked at me even ,
defender of your country ,
therefore with resignation bear it .
when children are naughty , and will not be drest ,
elias must first come ?
the henchman all ;
or the gulf of the rich caribbees ? "
and to crown our devotion , and grateful goodwill ,
a master mead - house , mightier far
lived by the earth 's mere charity .
the rock - built mountain , and the winding shore ;
yet himself had sundered / from all his men the king ;
of mighty worth .   " o tell me , sire rever'd !
dear mother , how pretty
and what will ye leave to your ain mither dear ,
earth sleeps , yet , high in heaven , the night
portend the suitors fated to my sword . '
the intention , furthermore , to grasp the reflex of things
through the streets of the city immortal
' every eve , when the clock chimes eight ,
for it hath learned the alphabet of life ,
how glad am i that fate while roaming ,
all things by immortal power ,
like silvery tapers bright
she said ; and smiling view'd her mighty boy ;
lo , where he dwells in solitude and prayer !
come pledge me on this ground !
united freinds for ever .
then , with an aspect cold and grim ,
the sound of the delight of it .
" in the palace of the blue stone she lies forever
to have no bread was bread to thee .                    g.
seem sometimes to express
" beyond the tumbling of this tide . "
glendalough , thy gloomy wave
while praising , calmed the youthful chieftain 's rage .
for all the rest , how ever fayre it be ,
and lash with furious strokes the trembling ground !
so eminently never had bin known .
set down with faithful pen !   let now thy voice
the sky is gray wrapping paper
serene the climes and mild the sky ,
one who his scripture guide has quite forsook
as grand emancipators they should issue forth .
to him of look divine ,
sees yonder sun , from his meridian height ,
of yore so cold and drear ,
the broken sheds looked sad and strange :
what shall i of fierce attila , what say
grinning , the lovers sigh and stare
see with what confidence he wends his way
an ' think it fine !
and more than one valois will sigh
or the juniper when growing .
not young , no doubt he would be quite content
the fading picture tires my painful seeing ,
do persist and do not weary in this way,--it will bring your dear
the storm - wind , rushing through the sky ,
and be my bridesmaid . "
i do n't think we 've quite enjoyed anything since .
of myriad worlds , were made at my desire
in the merry month of may ,
golden , and framed by art divine ( a gift
whose laws immutably reign .
that his love
of those far distant , callow times
the point upon which the bargain went off for a time is equally
this household beast , that us'd the woodland grounds ,
she implor'd me from vice to abstain ,
bright as minerva 's yellow hair ,
and ye are wondrous strong!"--
from the marshes all unfrozen ,
quiet eyes ;
for i hear in thy thunders terrific that throb
was longest lived of any two - legged thing .
opening the quaint old cases with a smile that is half a tear .
love like a beggar came to me , ii . 118 .
my jean will soon be here
its cheeks are all covered with red
on her brute forehead , while her hoofs outpress
joss - pidgin - man chop chop begin ,
magic stallions swarm my stables ,
when julia sate within as pretty a bower
stumble as they seek to climb .
their inmost powers , as tho ' for me
a quality of loss
the queen of midas slept , and so may i.
like baal , when his prophets howled that name
by the savours of gibbets and stakes thou hast planted to bear to
the lord of gods then gave consent ,
and grant him his needed day .
one common maker bound me to the kind ?
metiri se quemque decet propriisque iuuari
paste in wondrous designs .
gleams in th ' ring of the watery moon ,
interque materna ubera
so sore as ye longed to talk your fill .
they will elude you at first and still more afterward , i will
and , if the subject is not too shocking ,
like vollied light'ning , when it rives the air ,
still rises unimpaired below ,
and far the end may be ;
' neath which thy slumb'ring soul lies hid ,
whereon a glorious carpet lay ,
but never a time to laugh or weep .
and to dance to the light castanet ;
" well then , " said james , " if what i say ,
  said one : " i am an outcast 's child ,
to yield up this his proper right to country and to king:--
fronting the germans , and the rush swept on .
that " money burned his pockets all away . "
thy spirit strays in the land of dreams .
to sue for inspirations , with the which ,
with friendship 's soft accents or sympathy 's tear .
then straightway arruns heard in one the bow - string how it rung ,
sham follows th[=e ] reu[=e]ge hangs o're their heads
' the sea grows stormy , the little ones moan .
for vigor , for spirit , for one thing or other--
belted with a belt of woollen ,
to mend my life i would endeavour ,
was a fraud of monstrous size
unto the court whan thei be come ,
a sweet voice singing in the topmost tower
singing ! )
for it sparkles with annie--
and wauken'd again i winna be . "
proceeding to a new consecration , and contented himself with the
and then , of course , they started with five - nines
of nastrond dire ,
el eco de su voz ; siento á la tierra
that sent the sparkling water high ,
and stow'd away the mast ; then with their sweeps
the roseate sun did light the east ,
when that bright shield and silver helm he spies ,
ye shal finde vs pore but true we can not be
and its lip was curled and fine .
sucking her balmey breath soft as he may :
_ etherial forms ! you chase the shooting stars ,
though thou wishest gold and silver !
due preparation made .
tell me what misfortune has disturb’d thee ? ”
he knew not that the chieftain lay
bridge o'er some torrent of ecuador 's vales !
that only shelter'd thefts of harmless love .
as the light breezes smooth their downy nap .
then fared it with sir pelleas as with one
back to his danes sir iring recoil'd with faltering pace ;
as in socrate , constantine besought
the soul of the beautiful baby passed on
we would have broke the pattern .
low on a ledge above the shadowed water
here 's fawn - skins , milder than a maiden 's cheek .
thus , o thus gloriously ,
who that gherardo is , that as thou sayst
be things worth waiting for on earth ,
the fox is fast upon the hill ,
" oh ! what frightful horrors these !
for merciful death , and then
now i can buy the meadow and hill :
i ween that faster than a leaf i ' the wind
lie scattered in the tangled grass ,
“ so twines the ivy round the lengthen'd bough :
and infinite compassion ,
when spray beginneth to springe ,
her conscious tail her joy declared :
all , our prime mother lost , avail'd to save
whereby all life has lived .
i yield ; and now am only drunk awake .
but from their midst one came towards the well ,
and ardour for the start ,
with eyes downbent , and brotherly bared head ,
supernatural world . thousands of those who believed , or wished to
or thought they were -- no matter which--
yet i , born under a propitious star ,
i am dear lord ,
then every girl a queen would be ,
a stream went voiceless by , still deadened more
he , knowing well how sure he was to speed ,
it were a journey like the path to heaven
i saw the civil sun drying earth 's tears ,
is she , though swans no softer are
uicto languida turbine ,
and stealthy , then , along the coping creeps :
down by the green and the gold of the sea .
and in my hand were violets .
' alt !   fall in along the troop - deck !   silence all !
a rank of wretched youths , with pinion'd hands ,
crimen sin capa ¡ el poder !
for who has sight so keen and strong
and what a blush were thine ,
i found of you one such , who for his deeds
days long gone by !
i wadna lose for kingdoms
their fame shall resound through american land .
drunken of moonlight , dazed by draughts of sky ,
can he write a letter concisely clear
the toll - gate stood beside the road ,
the last edition see , by long and co. ,
the islands that are ' stars of the blue aegaean , ' or with
quieter than the clouds that flow
never again to be
" of all the sounds , the most solemn and touching is the peal
so through the wood resounding rang question and reply .
give battle , till he own thee king .
dog - cart , droschky , and smart coupe ,
still bade us for the moment yield desire
how oft hereafter you may look for me
behold ! polites , one of priam 's sons ,
by dutchmen or by wind :
who for the spangles wears the funeral pall ?
the paris train .   but never mind!--
an ancient saga tells us how
too joyous to last ,
immortal in my love for you ,
dealt with us thus ?   behold thy sire and i
his services , he retired to valladolid , in old castile ,
untamoinen sets his fish - nets
in longitude tho ' sorely scanty ,
" plee , sir , i did n't laugh . "
o'erhang his wavy bed :
and vowed he would serve them the same the next day ,
both alike my soul inflame ,
gounod 's faust , or mozart 's don juan .
am i prepared to lay down my life for the british female ?
dare not hope to join on earth ,
such blows in stormy vengeance !   who he was
a youth unstable ;
from love 's due rights , nuptial embraces sweet ;
doodle - bug ! doodle - bug ! come on to supper .
in types from nature 's frown or smile ,
just a touch , however light ,
immortal , rapid , by the gods conferr'd
the leafy and heavy darkness of sleep to call
and talked with him of cain ;
i bade the old world and new friends adieu ,
till with god 's good grace we return again . "
the curse is gone , the bond are free--
the lintie on the dewy spray
" and gunther and gernot , / the noble knights and good ,
in accents of complete despair .
there for a while i justly reigned
her eyes and feet are of coral red .
she sighed , and said -- i am not for you !
to the loggia slinks carmela ,
not of earth onely but of highest heav'n .
the very life of things below . -
we 'll send the border knight . "
paint then , in words . you did before ;
thou art not idle : in thy higher sphere
when their voices thousands raise ,
i should have guessed that all was even ,
that , overcome my power , i turned my back
a soldier in the furrows--
and cooleth my feet with water after the dust of the way .
over the gloom of slavery 's night ,
" child of courage , my beloved ,
always to be alone !
" oh ! sir!--prepare to hear the worst ! ...
i , by the right of eldest born ,
and the pale candle - flame lights up our sins ,
i compast hem a kynde crafte & kende hit hem derne ,
which rectifies in you whate'er the world
stretch a hand to one unfriended ,
luctandum est , quae nosse nimis , quid ? dicere quantum est
than blood - guilt on her hands : which bride shall bear
hath long disturb'd the common weal ;
gettin ' three good meat meals a day
his name sir asbiorn of the mountain .
only a rose - leaf down .
  see in this connection my article " the elizabethan minor epic , "
and get them their spoons again .
' tis the eternal law
then bitterly outspoke the king ,
as ovid 's verse may give to understand ;
with fruits of happy sight ,
came forth to the sweet wise silence where soul
ploughed his red furrow ,
and the way in which he pommelled
discount what scant occasion gave ,
as after stormes , when clouds begin to cleare ,
a wondrous tracery appears :
champagne - colored
odysseus and his son , and they made ready and served the
meanwhile the youth , directed by his god ,
thy shores are empires , changed in all save thee--
to valhal now would go with pleasure ,
and from these twain mankind ; and in mankind
he leaves calypso 's isle . he sails for eighteen days , and
in all that he commands he would fulfil .
uertimus , in saeuas quod dedit ille feras ?
stage was in 1864 . she favored the performance of björnson 's and
made his cheeks look fresh and ruddy ;
by inward sympathy , shall all be won :
aut facti modo diuitis molorchi .
wistful and tired , with eyes a - tingle
every grace that grief dispenses ,
a sense more tragic than defeat and blight ,
upon her forehead gathers now--
of a soft - flowing river , here appeared
would bind , imprison , hang the right , and deify the wrong .
wind , wind ,
the swarming populace the chief detains ,
and scorn'd to cram her filthy maw ,
till my friends have said
whilst i am mouldering dust below .
to the halls of joy and pleasure . "
if he only contrive to keep readers awake ,
all forests , stintless stars ,
lay with her once upon a grassy mead ,
respecting the priest and taking the ransom that he offered ; but
' what were the parson 's children called ? ' said una .
i seem to see new meaning in my fate ,
no more to keep me wond'ring and suspense ,
where shame and faith lay dead .
and woven , in an hour of pain ,
from some black coffin - lid .
it now must stand exposed to light ,
dark behind is the horizon ,
they reared me , and i ran away--
( _ on her eighty - sixth birthday . _ )
at the bleak end of night ; he shivered there
without haste ,
who clears the bush and stream , with furious force
and the enduring strength of steel .
i leave the drowsing south and in dreams i northward fly ,
" how do i _ know _ ? " says he ;
his friendship was like a shady wood ,
yet the ear it fully knows ,
an impudent sparrow requested a song ,
receive you , as ye tell ( upon my page
if in that long - suspected trade
thinnest clothes , although it was the middle of winter .   he flew
you of living things ,
and clad it a ' wi ' lily flower ;
now is the time , when all the lights wax dim ;
but you never see nothin' , you do n't .
and they steadily ply their fathers ' trade ;
she to her teacher flew , and thus herself expressed :
mounts the fire - expiring courser ,
and eet and drank therto his fille
redressed . " such is the testimony of lingard ( chap . iv . , 1386 ) ,
sounding the deeps of oracles umbilical
l. 865 .    as when ( the north wind freshening ) near the bank
ere ten more suns illumed the morning sky .
around whose ruins sweeps the foam
an ' so no scandal here is started ,
" while in ourselves it shuts the sight ,
for all night long he seemed to see
master of every grace and ire ,
the holy consistory had bid mould
in shock of grief be termed a śloke . ”(46 )
be ours that happy task .
genoan bounds from tuscan .   east and west
disturbing not the deed ; but took the book ,
troy 's chosen chiefs urge council , what to dare ,
where jupiter bore him by a magic spell .
what paid the woodless man for so much pains ?
among arabian sands :
for nea lass plats her band for bairns
the fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain .
there lands the fiend , a spot like which perhaps
stood thinking on the beauty she had seen
in battle - storm then need i / never hauberk more to wear . "
if that yow list don ought for my preyere ,
therefore on that point to dwell ,
and while he led the way to the bride - bower
from him who is the first , as from the unit ,
epistles of the pond and plain ,
my worship , and the mysteries of my thought ;
and his eye waxed sad and dim .
broke on the field of his fame .
hippolutos , whose feet were trammelled fast ,
like mars commission’d to confound mankind .
the montagues carry the day in swamp place ;
ann and mary , they 're too common ;
where are forests , hot as fire ,
yankee doodle dandy ,
me , looking out at me .
some of the liquor hot he brought , i think ,
“ attempted . theseus with an oaken club
his kine in spring - time , when his pails are fill'd ,
make so much difference in his man 's affairs .
to hear the wind whistle without . '
by the sharp finger - tips of frost ;
aux immortelz , leur faisant sacrifices .
the watchers saw it lifting white
competent to the task assigned them than the hope and fear he had
givest me the forest - apple ,
" for naught can man avail ;
railin ' allers ' gin his fate .
the accusal of the sin , in our tribunal
of shade and light ; and wind , that smells
they heard .   god and their parents they blasphem'd ,
i flow to join the rhine ! "
in that case we shall bear ,
" branching so broad and long , that in the ground
hardly less beautiful than they ,
for mortal hearts an opiate divine ;
must not harm my harmless creatures .
it panted for thee like the hind at noon
well , such you are,--but well enough we know
and lays there still all night .
{ 165 } this was , no doubt , the little table that was set for
by the breathing of his voice , nor shrink and fade ?
than the place where i walk sometimes ?
or come ye here to wield your brand ,
the arab by his palm - girt desert pool ,
the chouries round his forehead waved .
and , whether i came in love or hate ,
how dismal is its roar !
notice has been taken of this story by the later poets . but the
the forwards are getting tired , and all the outsides
a mighty silence wrapped the veld in dreams .
so that no longer distant signs appear
ancestors .
ner ever tried to rack or ride around on old " p-_gassus _ " !
from out the ages dim :
bid him come here , his homage to declare .
" ye must not yet , dear comrades , think of ease or rest ;
with her wanton eyes , or me ?
and he will care for all the rest to shift ;
whate'er of change above you note ,
in this existunce , dry and wet
with shame so poignant , as remember'd yet
to margasus and phyllis lovely - girt ,
there , where yon pile , for party 's common weal ,
i hold my boy , and give my sorrow vent . "
the second bearing which his relations to louise have upon his
that i was furthest from all truth and love ,
and at the end his face grew pale ,
that haunted freckled caliban :
under our swords they fell ;
rose on a turret octagon ;
and hasten to its call .
sindolt , and hunolt ; these serv'd the brethren three ,
the prince was a lawless shameless youth ;
and , by the uplifting of his brow ,
i will drive thee farther onward ,
while youthful revels , masques , and courtly sights
" let none intrude but they !
and he heard the wee bird singing .
ulysses home again . give him his helmet , shield , and a couple of
a captain wise , well skilled in feats of war ,
the thrill of life along her keel ,
“ my mother here was made content ;
" nought know i of philosophy , "
the greedy sailor shall the seas forego ;
i love with all my soul ,
betook her to the groves , but delia 's self
of day and night ; which needs not thy belief ,
it slipped from politics to puns :
or in pity to his passion ,
you 've got some spelling and reading
the past -- the dark unfathom'd retrospect !
did n't stay with you long , but talked very openly to you ;
and my frame perish even in conquering pain ;
of coffins waiting burial .
with unexperienc't thought , and laid me downe
for both by nature are akin ;
i stand not where thou comest down and ownest thyself as mine ,
set up on three blinded hairs .
for well he knew what dangers frowned ,
the stewards , and the judge as well --
de black sheep says , " oh , what 's de use
kebbuck , a cheese ; a kebbuck heel = the last crust of a cheese .
upon the stones . with eyes half shut , i hear
and mould to every taste thy dear delusive shape .
my great south - woman , soon to rise
against all disputants , old and young .
let this maiden wander homeward ,
since charles , the wise , the valiant king ,
and bharat ’s army shook with fear
from the neck of my brother dear .
servant then brought him water in a beautiful golden ewer and
when i shall be in presence of my lord ,
i often wonder he
each hero draws in freedom 's cause ,
at length aton'd , her friendly pow'r shall join ,
all hasted then to council ; sorrow wrung
or thwart our higher , steadier aims ;
this may do -- maun do , sir , wi ' them wha
for better than lands is the help of his hands
for voyage -- voyage over dreamful seas
by hodius and epistrophus were brought
" what art thou pond'ring ? "   i in answer thus :
i sat me down to ponder ,
v for
can you not win what prize you please ?
grendel 's deeds .
the hero 's heart , to be unmoved ,
to bugle down the wintry verge
and since a friendly concourse centers here ,
of sovran light .   thenceforward , what i saw ,
our shatter’d barks may yet transport us o’er ,
quenching holy drouth .
fair quiet , have i found thee here ,
war till my sinews fail ;
tiaras glittering over kneeling slaves ;
roll ocean - like , or in the central wilds
no wretchedness for him who is no more ,
is the debt that we owe to you .
his favour sent on great and small
but neptune this , and pallas this denies ,
cloud - like , the dainty deity .
" my dear sir :   to ask me for my idea of general morris , is like
that lurk in the shadows and fill the dusk
and here , even now , above my head , a lusty rogue doth sing ;
this other splendid shape , which thou beholdst
of truest happiness .
she does not meddle with my wealth ,
unalterably firm his love entire
quoth tongue of neither maid nor wife
and all the eastern vale was grey and cold ;
three voices together
{ 18e }   some lines are wanting in the original .
o mildly on the british stage ,
gone is thy beauty , that did all excel :
the women in the alley
this my chamber of neglect
is aiding me ; and you must stoop and kiss :
i shall exact these payments as i will ,
a wind that wailed wearily slow ,
and deemed an angel 's tongue to hear
from rippling rock to rock . here accolon ,
“ yet ere these bounds
feels in its certain core death 's coming blow ;
commands me back inglorious to the shores
sits a maiden ,
the beasts are very wise ,
needs the compass to steer by .   pray always .   again
under his gloomie power i shall not long
he came not,--no , he came not ;
not to unheeding ears did it appeal ,
or phoebus , and they obeyed him utterly .
poor brown , who believes in himself -- and , another thing ,
shut from the blessings of the evening air ,
and when those deep and burning moments pass'd ,
within this nation ,
" god save the queen , " by turns .
in various lines converging , what the prow
had aye the grace o ' moderation .
and see what fortune can betide
something like tautology ; the six following lines are poor and
rather than any other ad libitum .
in practical matters a goose is;--
bending at the wild wind 's breath ,
and did all that lay in his power to look pleasant .
as from a dream .
jamie , come try me ;
foreseeing much of ill that might befall
edition is in 2 vols . or 1 vol . all other editions are in 1 vol .
and e'en his failings leaned to virtue 's side ;
like ither menseless , graceless brutes .
still will i cry , while my best hopes lie shattered ,
enfellowed in the duke of brunswick 's train
a glance , a word , a smile of thine outvies !
and prosecute each guilty soul ,
considered as the property of both .
and the trembling pau - puk - keewis
famed for being the birthplace of philip , and alexander the
whose sword had yielded ere his courtesy ,
he said th'old mare had bit his dad .
i should awhile of agramant discourse ,
" well , " cried he , " emperor , by god 's grace
has the night descended ?
like some new bee - swarm leaving the old hive ,
the dog in the night time now howls discontented ,
he never yet no villainy ne said
the foul fiend , shrieking around turnus ' head ,
know whether i be dextrous to subdue
is this her prudence , or her folly ?
so , hey , bonny boat , and ho , bonny boat ,
' the men are marching back ! ' "
all trace was vanish'd .   two yet neither seem'd
or some wild wolfe left thee a naked shame :
o mouth of southern sweetness ! that ripe kiss
and left his being in the hands of fate.--
that harmony , " not understood , "
although he has no ships to lose ,
nothing will content me for i want my spring again .
i 'd go myself to visit them if i but were a knight .
now this simple - minded piper
and the chilly clouds are hurrying away
resign the rifling of her charms !
as they balance up and down ,
and weeps as never mortal mourned before .
o pater , o genitor , o sanguen dis oriundum ,
" shall i put faith in ocean 's treacherous face ,
with scarlet and with yellow thread ;
thou measur'st time 's expanding wing
which death himself would shun with fear .
" study of lincoln , a " : painting by blendon campbell , 249 .
he dashed down the line , mid a storm of huzzas ,
riding on a steed of steeds !
than reign our english queen .
echoes of the web of mystery that spans
reader , as i may unto that devout
mournful the shepherd aristaeus stood
and breezes softer than a maiden 's breath
o prince , pursue but my advice ,
ev'n all the pow'rs and labours of thy breath .
and the evening sun descending
how calm the weary elements , how still--
anon upon this work .   i judged in haste .
at last an ancient wood they gained ,
schal duelle to the worldes ende .
reference to ,
skilled or practised in any sport . ill fashioned , at least ,
as day returns , as death returns , swung backwards and swung home ,
a lid of amber closed it up ;
and imprecations upon men and saints .
came murmurs of her beauty from the south ,
that i will grante him his sight again ,
of mary , ungrateful , who had served her this vay ,
commanded on achilles ' tomb to die ,
ca n't we protect ourselves from joe ?
" let his children be fatherless , and his wife a widow . "
beseeching , entreating
with eyes indifferent , though thoughtful grown ,
along with me : and thou shalt hear and wonder . "
the goodness , all the greatness , i had dreamed ;
perish'd , perish'd , lost and perish'd ,
suffer a little , and my land shall rise ,
no doubt , there 's something strikes a balance .   yes ,
and should that fair face beam on me eternal ,
do to garner all thy grain .
then stern misfortune from her bended bow
and twines december 's arms .
ergo istis socium se peccatoribus addit ?
of king nala , by the handmaid -- fair kesinia thus addressed ,
you said it often , just to prove
with ministeries due and solemn rites :
nor with the rising storm would vainly strive ,
lived with honour on his lands .
( _ waving his hand after the carriage . _ )
i know not,--but , when day appeared , the priests
god 's angry justice , since i did it not
pure truth in life or art ,
red , yellow , blue ,
let honor , truth , and manliness
when once the battle had begun ,
when all thy tears shall be as vain
through thicke and thinne , all night , all day , she driued ,
and out o ' the tawny sunset , before the rise o ' the moon ,
'' tis time , ' tis time , my dear marg'ret ,
they hear the mass , the host receive ,
in earliest time or latest , / by mortal ever seen ,
" i can not blame thy choice , " the sage replied ,
and now , aneath my tartan plaid ,
as whilom -- just over the strings by the nut ,
all up and down among the sheets ;
he neither felt his pulse , nor took
faces cheerful , full of whimsical mirth ,
with plumage drooping sadly ,
and who , like deborah , will arise and lead a valiant band
tell her a word that is on my mind . '
an ' now , agean , we brought ye droo
mount ! follow ! onward urge life 's dragon - hunt ! "
at the fourth kirk o ' fair scotland ,
to be a mother and give happy birth ,
i 'll follow you to sherwood with your men .
his loud - tongued ribaldry ; ' gainst him he knew
i have submitted to a new control--
and now with blazing fire their gallant barks
if love come , he will enter
burning for him with lawless flame .
fleet - footed as of yore ,
as very nightingales to sing .
yes ; bread and cheese ; he would not touch the meat
kal'e - va'tar ( kalewa'tar ) .    daughter of kaleva .
as a crown set upon a weary brow .
and a murmuring wash on the shore ,
soft lustre of red wine ,
he too is all qualities , he is action and power ,
and follow in the might
at once he would accept as fact the worst
to darken under camelot ; whence the king
ben had risen at that !
and yet , she wears upon her breast
and some the violet 's heavenly blue ,
lxvii . " not thine the fault " ; deiphobus replied ,
and they , detain'd by those coercive bands
" instead of dancers to dance , mither ,
through wide buprasian fields we forced the foes ,
he wiped his tears , and , drawing from his brows
as tho ' her hand were tight about my throat .
" oh no , i come not thus !   oh no , i 've come here
and there the little shop is , black and blighting ,
mournfully slowly they roll , silently swelling and mixing ,
yet _ there _ i still found that man 's innocence perish'd ,
you with the unpaid bill , despair,--
a people avaricious , envious , proud ;
to him well skilled in every part
struck her blow on blow upon the head ;
to see how big it is ; and as for me ,
and mind ye o ' the saturdays
the vedas(18)and their kindred lore .
to mighty lords , to monarchs , and to kings .
with titan hands grasping the rent black sky
more than briareus ' hundred hands and arms .
of her lovely and lovable eyes , soft and bright !
an ivory - white with disks of copper flecked .
by angels , changing guard within the sky ; "
the vision which god had sent him .   and the haughty king bade
quizás no podrás mañana _ .
and the great sun that wrought this happiness ,
of holy satisfaction , sure and real ,
and reason bids us for our own provide ;
the days went by , the monk was gone ,
some spark of fire divine--
and men , coming and going on the earth .
let me for you advantage as well as honor win ,
rocked by winds and waves of suomi ,
as some huge caldron hisses urged by force
that led thee back from man to god ,
scilicet in multis quoniam discordia signis
the promise in that speaking face ;
with full success thy trust will pay ,
the rhine and rhone and all the northern lands
loth still to warm me at another 's fire .
full - pleasured with what comes to me ,
the traveller on his way must press ,
on occasion of the demise of the late usurper , napoleon
gather the rose of love whitest yet is time ,
have been demanded , but that he report
once humbled thine aspiring flight ,
and lyons , where they lay .
lays a large book open upon his knees . )
than with eld on silks howe'er voluptuous . "
what , next , will be the science you attain ?
scattering broad - cast forth the corn in golden plenty
perceived that báli ’s princely son
yea , though god hateth us , he knows
and coarse of phrase -- your english all are so .
and raiment of the sorrow and the mirth
prec .   ' t was my father 's promise .
but one day , and it may be more ,
at the moist pumps incessantly we ply'd ,
i will remember this -- the sea ,
light as entrailed blossoms , that shalt find
for the warriors in our war ,
through it , o love , shone thy face , afar .
" no , no , by the hair of my chiny chin chin . "
wars worse than civil on emathian ( 1 ) plains ,
that blame is just as dear as praise
sharing your unconsciousness
though hosts of slaves conspire
a horror in god 's blessed air ;
nor did you know that i knelt down in prayer ,
o mother dear , how different it would be .
and led her gently to his country home ,
his guileful hate in friendly counsel dress'd :
but call ye thetis hither , i would give
grows still the stronger , strongly vex'd .
god and our cause , saint george for england stands ,
and now among the greeks thou spread'st abroad
itself upon her , so that she was wound
for beer to wash his throat out , then confessed
and it soon will blow us home to the old countree .
nor the cots and hamlets that know no more
hark , in his song no tremor of misgiving !
t`ung han - ching
and hereafter and forever
( if chance such embassy might please your ear )
with strange ideas of our trojan guest !
" in lieto aspetto il bel giardin s'aperse & c. "
and sacred to the sky .
brim toward the lips that once i held so dear .
a place so dear , i trust i still shall love ,
por si la puede ablandar
in sleepy sunshine mantling all ;
there sweet retreats and honeysuckled bowers ;
that one mans trunke becomes anothers toombe .
bring orchis , bring the fox - glove spire ,
staring into the dark . cheero !
and make me pure and true ,
come unto these yellow sands
( a case that 's still too common , )
" therefore is the birch left standing ,
of wastes of water , where the sea - gulls cry
no mortals do , i ween ,
that the walking of the stranger
and thus in prowess like a god the chief
never a step in the hall ,
my pinnacled walls employ .
fanny looks both good and pretty
our care , and endless rest our industry .
whose courage well was tried ,
when once he tunes his harp to sing ,
whatever hypocrites austerely talk
father of gods , have mercy thou ! thrust down the hated head
the solemn sacrifice call'd down the guest ;
imparadis't in one anothers arms
' father , you have forgot poor whittington ! '
to feed a nation ; ay , and powder enough
who was aubrey i wonder ?   then another :
" oh , not yet , not yet ! " cried dora , clasping the doll to her , and
and smiling , nestled in my bosom too .
the cohorts lifted      their linden - shields ,
such letters , such outpourings of herself !
to us the leafless autumn is not bare ,
the song of the king 's
if ever yet soft pity touch’d thy mind ,
for the little shavers .
( same as i did n't lie down and give up all
with lavish hand expended / the king thereto in fitting wise .
for all the town is risen , the father sends .
pallor et in primis titubans audacia furtis
who that its favour would be lost , believed ,
sleeping till the grass shoots upward
pall , and put a ring about his neck , and to make him “ a baron
that when before the cruel king i stand ,
holds keener anguish in its orb of brine ,
it is enough .
lycaon 's life beside the sounding river ;
he sniggles and dibbles for what comes by ,
forms a young ens , another and the same ;
what matter , brothers , if ye keep your post
the sea is very , very wide :
laws wise as nature , and as fixed as fate .
the tangle of the forest in his hair ,
and hector trembles and recedes with fear ;
about its feet of life 's unresting sea ;
is it the breeze affects mine eye ?
then mutely gazed around .
to see and not to see .   hence , crime on crime .
i walked along a terrace where
whisper soft my artless tale ,
spreading out thy glossy breast
some prepare simples , healing salves , or bands ,
" unutterable grief , o queen , thou biddest me renew
with the gallant good riou ,
and it will eccho her loue - languishment .
are given in vain , but what they seek they find )
for he that wolde him purefie ,
but ' t warn ' much l'arnin out o ' books we got ;
frigida quem semel est vitai pausa secuta;--
so long as little luncheons , love ,
have reached our haven by his side--
chief of the ten and lawgiver of the romans .
desert - life with beasts .
if he desires what others do ,
weep for me when i have perished ,
love came and gat fair greeting ;
then they loosed the hawsers , thrust the ship off from land , and
beneath cold ismarus our vessels bore .
o flesh , o grief , thou too shalt have our knee ,
his enemies . the men who never knew him ,
" all nations striving strong to make
creusa , whether her the fates from me unhappy drew ,
and vowed their vows were dust .
" and merrily to swear went they;--
still shalt thou shine .
oh , beautiful and bright !
with michael angelo ?   what has he done ,
like samuel 's in jehovah 's tutelage .
scouted at magic and charms , hooted at jonahs and hoodoos--
that from its pure recesses start .
and though she rolls a scornful eye
gone in the loins and knees--
this is the man who fought to save our country !
o , hush thee , my babie , the time soon will come ,
twelve parliament men shall be sold for a peny .
the golden windows towards the constant sun ,
for the friends it might bring me . by the way ,
can never dance three steps with a becoming air .
those wheels have yet to roll "   ( therewith his eyes
for no greater aim or purpose than our mirth .
and rites to heaven he duly paid .
and give him some pap ,
there 's nae room at my feet ;
and , leaving their sweet homes , in exile run
and then not knowing what to do ,
and struggling outward for a word :
the thin sad slates that cover up my home ;
bear witness both -- i heard the voice divine ,
and keep alive .
to see what men were doing in a world
one prayer , one and the same ;
will this perishing mould ,
þan schullen an hu{n}dred wormes wroten on þe skin .
her dream of size she saw , agape .
have not essay'd to multiply their clients ,
come quickly back .
and find in your breast a bower :
he stops , and questions thus his mighty soul ;
in to the summer land .
am made a god o'er men !
but they got it with the toe ( same as you will get it -- so!)--
thou wilt thy ignorant entry make
by all those sweets that be
earth green beneath the feet ,
and sit upon my knee ;
rinaldo had gladly been at roland 's side ,
essayed in vain her ghostly charm
while on the billowy ether borne
when i a heart had one ,
the assistance of medea . æson restored to youth by her magic
who now would love her more
refreshed in england or in other land ,
he took a boat , and landed at the point ;
when juan caught a glimpse of this sad sight ,
afar off in the blue,--
and gaze ne'er sated , saddened as they bent
brilliantly fair      above the back of the fowl .
should hide our walls , or whelm beneath the ground .
can rise in the morning gay ,
every heart of man or woman,--
i 'd choose jist pink wee rosies
and thus his scorn and hate expressed :
" lodgings within here , at five cents per night ! "
unless thy mother 's words are wrong--
he speaks not for himself :   the outcast this
and a long cluster from the laurel hung .
or i , who makes me sad ?   the acolyte
are the hearts which man
  the " songs of scotland , " by allan cunningham , vol . i. p. 247 .
his mind 's eye dark .   but lo !   where eunoe cows !
the flag of stars and stripes--
who impiously foment intestine jars ,
and act a   noble part .
' twas midnight past , and the fairies ' hour ,
nor leave you in your greatest need .
its flaming terror overhead
where the bold africans their standards plant ,
with his martial cloak around him .
could ne'er my heart repay
we on that parched precipice ,
and to me the longest lever ,
aim then , and pray to lycian apollo , the famous archer ; vow that
untold intent ;
keeping pace with life 's ambition ,
gracing the mountain or hid in the fen ;
and is not mine , my friend , a sorer case ,
as much as the celestial sun
the streets of silver heaven may tread ,
and she is left in all that light alone ;
in what strange path , my lord 's fair footsteppes bleed .
so lowly , slowly wound the tune along ,
with pillared vines on either side ,
arose in radiance .      then the righteous man
back , like a ghost from her forbidden home !
had fought , nor traffic'd in the soldan 's land ) ,
to other eyes as mine already see it .
o'ershadowing all charybdis ; therefore hard
oh , heart !
o comrade!--tell me,--is it all a dream ;
so foully slay'st my friends ! but ere we part ,
and i said , ' o heart ! there is no use trying ,
alcimus shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses
long days beneath the chesnuts shady ?
and now , from all - enquiring light ,
but the broncho 's tail was scorched a sight ,
of those huge pinions on the sea below ,
through the river of tuoni ,
shall seem a soft luxurious bed .
and in wrytinge curious ,
the song is done , but a phantom
never stain thy lips with falsehood ,
' and thither let the village swain repair ;
that this unheard - of bliss is no fond dream .
but deep within his heart was writ
and should prize my friendship , and bowed as he spake .
towards yonder cloud - land in the west ,
clad about in rich raiment . easy it is for the gods who
in some nice suburb not too far from town ,
with its wet , weedy frill ;
ludo fatigatumque somno ,
than throbbing blood , and that the self - same pains
my spirit is tuned to the spring - season :
a maid of virtue is a precious gem ,
of sleep can never cheat
that is how it happened on a creeping train ,
begin with vs , who neuer did offend ,
steeped to the lips in misery ,
if some _ other _ things you 've forgot--
with juan , left half - kill'd some stanzas back .
they were _ almost _ as wise as sir thomas himself .
but one thing!--for insurance ' sake , i pray thee ,
" larrie 's courtin ' o ' me ,
till they fand it in the fair plum - tree
this lettre cam , and ther was press
' twixt the winking new spoons and the napkins ' array ,
if words are words , or death is death , or powder sends the ball ,
saying : " speak thou : this one a latian is . "
i lift my heart as spring lifts up
they fall into ranks in a double row ;
thus much i at least may recall ,
and , save hir browes ioyneden y - fere ,
within them -- never to forgive
the better graces nurtures plump and fair :
dare now range the wood ,
not december 's brightest flame . "
oh ! what is life when only shadows fall !
half pants , half whistles , in her draught ;
ho , the bully rover jack ,
" shall i not play the messenger , and urge
when the evening star was shining ,
fate bids me languish long ages away ;
the path that leads , where , hung sublime ,
in comes the little dog ,
thus it was smith ilmarinen
sate on her golden chariot mounted high ,
" we is lucky , sho , ter - day ;
and in the face that turned i saw two eyes that burned ,
so spake i ; and when he had onward mov'd ,
down from the frayed and flaccid rags that cling
read through her launching heart , who had lain long
and end my auld days in renown ? "
dim , dead sea - folk , my sires--
the united world 's assault it well might dare ,
heard on lavernia scargill 's whispering trees ,
the sounds my ear that greet ;
upon this heart that loves and hates you both !
thou have received from heav'n thy father 's force
still , still , burns on .
before the eternal father 's sight .
along the mead - seats , making his song
now he feels the morning thrill ,
tourneys , a   courser , or charger .
the body of a land , and rout
of grove or garden - plot more pleasant lay ,
lightly the bright months fly out of my hand ,
and with sugríva turned his eye
blund'rers who level in the dark ,
that none in arms can rival me :
both : _ we tell these tales which are strictest true , etc . _
when to the grave descends the sensual sot ,
away down the hill .
one can not help feeling that the poet in this description has a
do not mourn me , dearest brother ,
the tundras belted by the sky .
what the grand doings of the administration ?
once i saw mountains angry ,
the fennel , with its yellow flowers ,
the cold , far feet of the tides
roll and tumble to the mountain ,
having written a few small books which have been published by a
with stern , unloving eyes,--
scroggam , my dearie , ruffum .
that had best been faced in earlier years :
no holiday have seen .
as many a girl before,--
and leave thee sleeping in thy urn .
" balder , there yet are many scalds in heaven
rent from a thunder - splitten height ,
on a single fishing smack ,
" is this the chief , who , lost to sense of shame ,
around the chief let lakshmaṇ stand ,
was flung the wall 's huge shadow ,
downward the starry tapers burn ,
her love had been a highland laddie ,
no word of greeting for his bondwoman ? "
all stretch'd to speak , from whence i straight conceiv'd
unproved by outward evidence ,
arts , sciences , and grammar rules ;
into giving better pay to get them
" i 'll bring him home , and gladly , " said hagan , frowning stern ;
where luvah doth renew his horses : lookst thou on my youth .
fearless , and rapt away from all his cares ;
this said , he formd thee , adam , thee o man
of pig - iron , the strong clean - shaped trail for railroads ,
wee , weenty - teenty baby - foxes , with
wrapped in wonder ; some
and let your dress , be just in every part ;
out of the vague and sombre fold of night .
trait or some fair semblance : thus of cembelins her " esgart
himself apollo , for the lovely nymph
for inlet there , of different colour each ,
suits not the visage , open'd wide his lips
and the sound of the children is still ,
bride , around whom the rosy loves are flying ,
roved round his castle but to ascertain
no stone is o'er those graves:--the sullen tide ,
oh peggy she was straight and tall as is the poplar tree ,
telling the dane his acts and conquests past ,
is not the day which god 's word promiseth
and the starlight dies in heaven .
and heart more false !
quaesitor ille solus
do not fear to do or dare ;
lighting young fancy 's virgin waves below ,
would love her as my servitor ,
flowers for memory , hid away ,
such danger did my form display ,
when spring comes stealing from the southland ;
everywhere light seems breaking forth into flower and star ,
it chanced the saint had gone away ,
" bright ladies and brave knights of fatherland ;
still on her evil purpose bent ,
that its foundation laid .
loud shouted brave tydides , as she fled :
called the hosts of sariola ,
he shows more appetite for words than war .
ere i descended into hell 's abyss ,
( who in life were walking here once ) ,
himself the very heart and soul of it .
to meet , to greet ,
hath in his court , and wol noght knowe
your hearts may be ; not such were those who stood
then for his voice , there 's none disputes
and testified against their ways ; he oft
like one who does valentian lady 's hest .
( 12 ) " dankwart " is not an historical character nor one that
and he never had many bad fights ;
bear witness with our spirits that we seek
long is it since they ceased to look on light ,
quiv'ring express'd his pang .   " whoe'er thou art ,
send you to your kin , the shark !
or rankle longer in the mind .
did you ever hear of a thing like that ?
did mingle with them , whether of those hags
fountains sing in every square ,
as for a kiss ungiven and long desired .
reflect , thy choice with judgment make ,
who was it started this quarrel ?
the varied feelings battling in my brain ;
that papists and atheists suppressed may be .
oh , i told you
famed king and emperor , who that list have swelled ,
por tierra fragosa
if you 'll be content , till the storm shall be spent ,
they heaved in john barleycorn ,
guarding railroad bridges and the like ,
the well - deserving stranger entertain ;
so merrily march the merchantmen .
where the northland - pike assemble .
come swelling , now float indistinct away .
amid leaves and flowers and sunshine ,
and by the draught assimilated ,
may serve thee still .
above the bloody muck that had been lips
from her fair grace cast out .   ' tis then i weet
like a girl 's strange mirth , ere the quick death slay
that the boy might be cremated ,
and makes the ivy climb the oak ,
--"now beware ! " rumbled yonder .
" my head hangs weighed with snow . "
after five years of married life the wife wrote him as follows :
ye imbeciles in present power ,
had i now the wings of a fairy ,
at last i saw the shadowed bars ,
as the light does the shadow .   woe is me
and noblemen beside ;
all joyfully she turned ,
shattered as potsherds are ! "
endlessly round and round ,
falteringly , as they hailed ,
his mind would hold with desperate clutch
as he leaped and staggered through it ,
" these is my wimmin folk !   an ' i 'm a man ! "
  father , father , who is that who laughs
i would mak ' that maiden my queen .
and you in your mild journey pass the hole
as yours to you !
beneath thy burning eye ;
shall be the last of realms to crumble and to fall .
draw near , but first his certain fortune know ;
their engines eke they reared , and with great art
that woman 's lip , or tongue , or eye did
vous plait " ) ,
my dyner for to crave .
but she 's not the woman that molly is -- never .
the same , to make the world acquainted
but across the entry barred
and so thought raymond , who discovered naught
the sun and moon and stars his eyes have seen ,
as shrubless crags within the mist ;
sent down the meek - eyed peace ;
whence can this woe upon thee fall ,
in which a nobler woman sleeps ;
he plunged to save his sheep ,
we have laid all at stake
contrary sound we take instead thereof .
merrily flies the golden shuttle ,
restrained , ver . 584 - -character of an incorrigible poet , ver .
terrible deeds , and marvellous perform'd ,
high are the mountains , and from peak to peak
through happy tears the goddess face to face
proudly turns he round and kindly ,
that jayadev doth sing ,
in clomping there , he scared it once again
but they could not find a hero ,
the growing green of many trackless years .
for thou must walk in barefoot ways ,
i have forgotten how .
he has prospered on his journey ,
a little farther on ma cries : " he signaled for
will be in lady angus ' care ,
showed like a female monkey round
as fiery coursers in the rapid race
but lays " by the most celebrated pens , "
imprisoned in a baking powder can ,
the next will be a rainy day .
the son of jove and leto ; for he was angry with the king and sent
underneath all , individuals ,
the glow of the stars , and the breath of the wind
what mean these stale moralities ,
my deere sone,--the king dothe approve well of your going into
brightly expressive as the twins of loeda ,
the leaves lisp ' neath a rolling moon .
from where its margin borders on the void ,
his tender song !
he was forced to go with never a bite ,
beside another love in regal state ,
and limbs were pierced and blood - distained .
leniter frenas facilique septos
gone to his death - bed
i think the turk will try ! '
thou'rt gone , the abyss of heaven
el hondo valle y enriscada cumbre ,
euphrates flows and tigris , and did earth
shall be cast forth , and whelm'd under the waves
is truth , that of himself to moses saith ,
stood stedfast , unalarm'd ; but yet she blush'd .
well mightst thou rive thy quill up to the back ,
the fires that over sodom fell
my first to get at wisdom tries -
the sole profession left him to assuage his stomach ’s woe ,
of pebbly sands , or leaping down the rocks ,
the eternal gamin , sleeping half the day ,
still opens more to me its beauteous dower;--
tho ' the eyes be overtaken ,
when stormy winds and gales refuse to blow ,
the maid had stood gazing upon the veil
about him throng the foe : all round the strokes on him are laid
mariner _ in the second edition of the _ lyrical ballads _ : ' the
god controls the fate of nations ,
and if you need our help again you have out there to come . "
all we , whose beards are flecked with grey ,
and that 's enough .
he watches in the lonely street .
and rest them when she 's here !
her father would trundle her in the park;--
at first these excursions had been undertaken principally from
there is something in the autumn that is native to my blood--
and theseus his sister took anon
playing in the wanton air :
and thought thee poet pye _ at least _ !
go , like the indian , in another life
enfranchis’d to eternity ?
the smallest flowers he made .
upon the sacred history of our isle ;
but with the swing of legs the tramp , tramp , tramp
answer,--"good sir yamabushi , take me with you now!--
sauntered downward to the boathouse ,
but famine 's at the city gate ,
without duplicity ,
while from the side it never more may warn
there is peace between the ojibways
for oueen kaikeyí cries , away . ”
for all their ca nt and falshood is his own .             }
but , infirm and aged crones ,
rose the belated tide ,
which even now set all my mind ablaze
an only son left with an only mother
in gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls ,
through the grey willows danced the fretful gnat ,
with the lord 's chosen prophet .
thus is the churche defylyd with vylany
centre being the sustained homage paid by the
is fancy 's spring , but sorrow 's fall .
p. 214 . to etesia ( for timander ) the first sight .
to touch the heart or fire the blood at will ?
and luscious scallops to allure the tastes
but more than all is carle distressed ; he mourns
to italy . go , set the storm - winds free ,
he read his books and played his games,--he even sang a song
fixe heere thy wat'ry eyes upon these towers ,
dey ish fixed firm und immutaple ash de course of de ' ternal sun :
to tell that what he could mindlessly show
shall i look to ease my grief ( jones )
in loving thou dost well , in passion not ,
does any falter ? let him turn
leaves in the light and warmth of suns new - born .
of the old - world traditions , eden fruits
how through the air the storm doth whirl !
shameful and vain . existing for himself ,
with woe i nightly vigils keep ,
his own indictment ; he condemns himself ;
go to wait and watch beside it ;
you must have cur'us notions
yet i wish well to trojan and to tyrian ,
well , let me see ; can any theme
from conning - tower to hold .
the rollicking mastodon tripped along ,
that widen in their course .
alike they stood in form and might ,
now here and now there , along the street ,
o messenger , art thou the king , or i ?
or skim , like a bird ,
which partly assuaged his despair .
there are roses ' neath her head :
no , not in heaven , than _ caelia 's kiss _ ; "
or else she dances with becoming grace ,
i long to rest , my labour done ,
and have i but a web of sorrow wrought ?
this tress shall rest upon my heart ,
his country 's honor , and its hard - earned gold .
how many a bard i doted on
where brown leaves fall , where drifts lie deep
it was amazement , wonder and delight ,
shooting the wrath of my rapids , scaling my ramparts of snow ;
the wise , the great , the good !
and thy attentions plighted ,
all scattering flushing 's garden flowers
to my sports and my pastures alway .
the droning tram - cars spitting light :
but in those limits such a growth has sprung
if once set ; flying ,
of those in wilds who rove .
that stoops , to seize his trembling prize ,
and young serranus fair of face , who played the night away
next , let it well be understood
where first i pondered on the grammar - lore ,
canto viii . manthará ’s speech .
and yet the chief were living ! ' tis all too true a tale ;
whom swinging down he dash'd upon a rock ,
his mother gave him , but the youthful band
in sight of god enthron'd , our happie state
ye , who sometimes in your rambles
and he lived on the isle of chips ;
you vowed on that occasion to obey . "
o may i join the choir invisible , 51 .
when from a million herbs a blaze
that house but little less than heaven we call .
wisdom supreme , tongue of eternity .
" there the black gibbet glooms beside the way " .   the
“ than have we liking to lithe ( listen to ) the _ lates _ of the
heart - burdened with undying grief , for love
then faded , and anon she stood all pale ,
is genuine , solid , old teutonic pluck ;
of what persone that him liketh ,
for people will always be kind ,
o'er wistful waters : ' neath this sycamore ,
walks stately in the cooling shade ,
a broad and ample road , whose dust is gold ,
the master has finished his work , and the glory
i almost love you , i believe i love you . "
leave thy station for the borders ,
" ah , make a little place where i can lie ! "
you told me , last night ,
when christmas comes about again ,
not meerly titular , since by decree
snug and safe in that nest of ours ,
our owne requestis sholde tourne vs to great yll
my back was commencin ' to strain , as ' twas .
be humble , meek , and low of heart ,
flowers and leaves gently nod and sway .
thy hand against the servants of the lord ,
all things lay bare : the future yet unveiled
whose life has passed without a stain , beguile
and am i to be put upon
lace , ribbons , and _ coquette
clashing loudly with the law ,
“ some of a purple teint ; and these and those
thou the great primeval minstrel ,
the well known characters of some lov'd friend ,
what god would outwardly alone control ,
and i , whom a new thirst still goaded on ,
with gleam of bows and armlets bright ,
tost up and down , together crowded drove
palace , closing on high - sounding hinge , i have seen thee ,
then mayst thou joy and be right glad ,
she have been noted in the fire ; the next was as if her flesh and
and now , veloso to the fleet convey'd ,
from one who well my lady knew ,
come on , mac swiggen , come -- your muse is willing ,
and hung their blossoms like a show .
karshish , cleon , norbert , and the fifty .
blessed man , whom old age overtook among his own
to this my errand , and the care it brought .
bebiendo luz y respirando aromas .
while mother from the kitchen - door is calling with a will :
like a seer'd stake , and part fell at his feet .
you 'll only skip the page , you 'll look
such a selfish reason trips
and pious pilgrims , mother mine !
a peril lurked -- burleigh 's emissaries ,
all greater than your wish .
now , tam and will did trip and fa ' ,
received the cavalier with honour due .
and blessing him for her sweet sake ,
sche hath me wonne to hire man :
came that second birth of love ,
suspensus in oscula matris
of hicetaon , coming forth to fight ,
still happy and serene , after how many years ?
whose pallid burden , sick with pain , watches
at anyone who passes there .
john with a sword that will not fail ,
ye may caar(2 ) ye daan afoor me ,
cling ,
( skill’d in the manage of the bounding steed )
and the brooding mother - bird
and whispers through your walls .
warbled that the spring was here .
o listen to the howling groves ,
then some , who through this garden pass ,
he nodded oath withal
thund'ring he fell ; deep grief possess'd the greeks
which hadde al irahel to rihte ;
and while her echoes sleep
i saw a giant led by a dwarf
laugh at my urn ,
both who thou art , and all that thou hast borne .
the colours of my fragrant flower
what is your ladyship 's mood ?
and the kettles all were singing ,
the way we all must go .
woods have made way for our cities of ease ?
each field for ever boasts its bowers ,
give sorrow to whom they will -- even to kings if it so pleases
which now you can not know :
mossén juan tallante . the title of this personage may indicate an
where the swift - heel’d achilles and bold diomed
a rocky mass to upper heaven uprears .
what a terrible to - do !
coom tromplin from de land .
or like the borealis race ,
never come near thee again--
sail without the aid of rowers ,
renne ( run ) ,     ran ,                 runnen .
if such folks would but strict attention lend
song ( from ' the vicar of wakefield ' )
painter and poet are proud , in the artist - list enrolled:--
administration -- all the desks , and ledgers , and powers of downing
truécanse al fin en plácida tristeza ;
to telle in short , hir lyked al y - fere ,
on a rich man 's table , rim to rim .
ah , hold her by the hand ,
asking thee to sit beside them ;
the fellow said it was my fault ,
that make the meadows green ; and , poured round all ,
" and thou art done and being done must die ,
oh , come to me when daylight sets ;
beguiled i gave thee to a fiend
my downcast looks , and at the way i mourn .
shall surely broken be ,
whose birth i dreaded .
and friends were having tea close by .
in the water - flags and lilies ,
just court ,
the cool gray light of morning ' gins to peer
than he his rente hom brynge ,
thy shoulders often hast thou let them see ,
far as the straining eye can gaze ,
" what silly things these mothers are , "
are moved to murmur , ' let us spray ! '
one of the human race with pure and noble mind ;
laid neck and heels by that confounded bond !
he had high cheek - bones , and a strong square chin ,
goddess of freedom , thy scrip is low ,
driving sheep and crooning softly
then diomed of the loud war - cry also prayed : " hear me too , " said
" dying of a broken heart--
the murmurous moments of may - time ,
“ from all earth 's regions every stream ; all streams
twas thee _ gyneura _ , twas thy fairest selfe ,
" of your valour so matchless you 're wondrously full ,
to yow nolde i no swiche tales bringe . '
far over the roofs of the houses , i hear the barking of leo ;
shall happy be at last .
« i shall build thee a statue that will be
what difference ' twixt the idolater and you ,
for i a prompt alacrity agnize
spit sorrow and disgrace ,
enthroned o'er all the scene ;
' thereby may one descend : but they that make
unlocking all the house of hell , showing that country 's shape ,
youth 's charm has like a fleeting shadow gone ,
the brazen arms reflect a beamy light :
ah , the light dances , my darling , at the centre of my life ; the
the tract most barb'rous of sardinia 's isle ,
of the clan of conn ,
the son of man , the atoning wounds -
which the strong winds lift from the parched lands
over the sand heaps and brown sod ,
constance has dressed the dolly -- you see how nice it looks--
let us in a lovers ' round ( mason and earsden )
but all these , save the last , being obsolete ,
slung atween the round shot , listenin ' for the drum ,
the bulwark of the free .
are tricked with sūrm--
and , when my brother thrust her with his sword ,
that with us here you deign to talk ,
some sickly cankered leaf
and then surcease .   truth will be truth alway .
antiquest felt at noon
but we maun dree a sadder fate
to the forgiven transgressor only pain
had better kiver up ,
an ' ' mang the first , as it befell ,
so , questioning myself what real gift
" your friend , as much to command as any of longer date ,
the wakeful mind of aegis - bearing jove ;
life and life 's love for song , god 's living gold ;
and curling and whirling and purling and twirling ,
by arthur 's great name and his little love ,
to pen my musings on some vacant page .
high o'er the road the ball triumphing flies ,
the wormwood 's bitter draught , and , though befooled ,
to practise all the amorous arts of ovid ,
" yes ; seest thou not our journey 's end ?
upthrust , out - staggering on the world ,
until he came to high - towered camelot .
' t was the deep hush of midnight ; the stars from the sky
forty homes in sable shroudings ,
declare she never lived who lived so well ;
as were poor enough to be very merry ; for i ever found them
o bonus , o ingens meritis , o proximus ipsi ,
the man on avalanche doth yell
{ 131e }   lit . “ with the strength of steeds . ”
and beats the matted grass , and still the earth
and euery starre with spangles set betwixt
and stay in your own room .
with an old , old , old , old lady ,
which took me reading in the sacred book ,
alcides , our avenger came , driving the victor 's meed ,
it , and the fat soaks in for the many that pull at it , and it is
so perish monuments of mortal birth ,
strong , tawny faces , some , and some are fair ,
but fate , which none may comprehend ,
chi - co 's love was fierce as fire
i sat me weary on a pillar 's base ,
of fame - drunk emperies ,
medea , iii .
nor all the longings      of my life of woe .
th ' offence , that man should thus attain to know ?
darkness and hissing all she sees and hears;--
all these thoughts of love and strife
are yet a master - light of all our seeing ;
o'er his ankles flowed the streamlet ,
a hundred rose ' ad vocem tanti senis , '
she went to the mill to fetch me some flour ,
here , now , to hold that birth - right , or to yield .
let venus go and chuck her dainty page ,
lift , a load .
yet might'st thou seem , proud privilege , to sing
if wit were always radiant ,
air--_"lass , gin i come near you . " _
till over - wrought , the general system feels
wherof , to take mi witnesse ,
for me , had heaven decreed a longer day ,
arthur james johnes , esq . , garthmill , welshpool , 3 copies .
from either foot fell .
of holy blue .
full honestly
her writings to the leaves consign'd ,
i die with pain -- in sooth i do !
as that old sweetheart of mine .
the light of pensive hope unquenched
but mark the price paid for their brief success ;
there 's death in the cup , so beware !
swiftly my sword i drew and cut it down ,
“ but asamanj the cruel laid
in heaven yclept euphrosyne ,
often were traitors to country and dear parents
arteries .
to know both good and evil , since his taste
then you touch the nerve of change ,
decreed for caesar 's triumph : and the war
marvelling why he there was naked cast ,
that satyr he but burnt his lips ;
for you never shut your eye ,
and i never can enjoy , nor wear thee ? ”
at last by long - wrought penance i
as of most powers , her would rogero ward
again and yet again , then sank and died ;
in the winter you are cowering
one at her left , one at her right ,
between the sword of light
the hours are from eight till six -- you see
and drives mankind to visit them in throngs
the episode of life 's hack chronicle !
to bid thee happily good - bye
what in fancy can you see ?
swings out in sun and air .
and no one stirs however you seek ,
tell how , as moses on the unknown mount ,
from crossing of proverbs ( let ' um hang that confess ) ;
she told him of gervase , and as she spoke
with a busy heart and hand ,
then , gazing on suvela ’s crest ,
i love my life , but not too well
thou knowest it how i love these dear humanities .
so to beguile a worthi queene ,
whom light and hymns from heav'n did bless .
reason , is free ; and reason he made right ,
( aleel _ releases the _ angel _ and kneels _ . )
grew to a storm their clamor :
a fawn his talons truss’d , ( divine portent ! )
undisciplined of aught but ignorance ,
but worms soon fell on my neck , by chance ,
“ thy marriage torches , anxious to behold
a dreadful shout and tumult infinite
the spirit 's fond imaginings destroy .
of the fountain of your tears .
that , hanging round them , here a bosom kissed
exprimet , & molles imitabitur ore capillos ;
so comely was laid low on earth , for jove had now delivered him
and read that moderate man voltaire .
and still returned as empty as i went .
with a rowley powley , & c.
i loves saltin ' , saltin ' bread .
barba resecta mihi bisue semelue fuit .
which , reflected , floating there ,
whose welcome is the morn and eve his parting ,
little thoughtful creatures sit
that pine the mother 's face to meet !
frisch weht der wind
we wait for an oncoming day
by means of these , and the whole cause reveal
print a tale so dark as thou could'st tell !
nonne vides quanto celebretur sportula fumo ?
took owre the kirk - yard yett :
and heavy hue which slumber could extend
every gem ,
and when some forty years are fled ,
how jocund did they drive their team afield !
to wrap the baby bunting in .
he said some extravagant things
such as sprung up in magdalene 's cheek
_ a voice from above . _ what wouldst _ thou _ with me ?
" i am taking the drops , and am using the paste ,
the sick blind youth , who now was sinking fast .
and riches bore they with them right sumptuously to live .
saw the flock of brant with wonder ,
has their last soft word been spoken
unwise semaine why idly rave ?
which others can not understand .
& ȝet nabuȝardan nyl neu{er } stynt ,
kindle never - dying fires:--
and my _ début _ in paris , i blush to think on it ,
for the world to know me , and sometimes wondering why it did
not a word the maiden uttered ,
' come , my friends , let us ask the stranger whether he is
and euer besy weyes for to seche
gently,--as we sometimes glide
for the green vines were torn from the trellis - work fair ,
are worthless without thee .
enough that over us by night
and , smiling , looked her in the eye ;
nor need the unready virgin strike her breast ,
pious rites are due to foemen and to friends and kinsmen slain ,
and they bore me to a sleigh ,
the hills were shining in their samite ,
rejoicing in his work which he hath done .
somewhat flattened out and ugly ;
and the green hollin abune their bree .
son , " said he , " of noble tydeus , my arrow failed to lay you low ,
too well i see and rue the dire event ,
hypsipyle beguil'd , a virgin young ,
her simple heart could not but feel
it is not good to see him strain
not the circean wine
our young noblemen ' at english schools ! ]
his words , more calmly thus pursued .
and leave us just as we were ?
knows not its soul as yet , nor god . but here
fast rattling on his traces go ;
a friendship for the brave ,
and feeling weak have you been led
titus or trajan 's ? no--'tis that of time :
" my dear , will you be so kind as to show me the house of king
to boast our numbers , and the pomp of war :
and the cool forest and the meadows green
we smiled upon each other then ,
its lessons alone are the things you should keep .
keen watch , and wait , until from carduel 's tower ,
ukko , the benign creator ,
for sure he seem’d not of terrestrial line !
we keep the vision of his chivalry .
of kin and friends ; but i in this sad plight
only ( the people of that city beingvguelfi ) to enable the party
tone , he said :   " the poetry i herewith send was
calm stands the myrtle and the laurel high .
searching and seeking everywhere
the worn - out mill the bleak horizon notch,--
this was in the white of the year ,
whose annual wound in lebanon allured
you would have seen another style of fence .
back , back in gloom , to silent tombs ,
i ’ve ever found thee faithful yet ;
can seldom pass without being turned astray .
was longing to strike down idomeneus , but ere he could do so
the strong man fights , but the sick man dies .
by at the gallop goes he .
  _ zahir _ = exoteric , as opposed to _ batin _ = esoteric , in line 2 .
i waded , where my pets were wo nt to rove :
the kisses of fair youths grow dull and sicken ,
" why , what 's happened ? you had three hundred a year . "
what wretch has had the cruelty to wound
which o'er her forehead stream'd , and prostrate dragg'd
for the blest ardour that irradiates all things
and forgiving be —
set the boy upon the summit ,
and grappled at the fell , as one who mounts ,
lleve su triste acento .
that báli by thy hand shall fall .
of cabinets , shut up for years ,
not a creature of the forest ,
that saint cigar i may be canonized ? "
great beauty , until he bade them bring the lovely woman
all shrunk and wizen ,
quick a knife falls from the heavens ,
that none , but with a clue of thread ,
that hangs upon your face ;
love came to me as comes a cruel sun ,
_ him who trembles before the flame and the flood ,
all that you tell me emanates from hatred [ o mullah ] !
nae ferlie ' tis tho ' fickle she prove ,
which robed in clouds and capped with glittering ice ,
he the minstrel most illustrious ,
perle plesaunte to prynces paye
the darkness closed around them .
your pity i will not implore ,
is hunting for blood in no man 's land .
yea , only there it burns with any flame .
thus did he vaunt , and the argives were stung by his saying .
yield him a victim to novara 's power ,
er he hir wan , yet was ther more to done .
the rustics full of mirth and glee ,
in a dead white face .
one from the top      of a tree in the woods
an ' he weigh tree hundred pounds ;
callimachus and his contemporaries the pure greek tradition still
this land of faith and tears
was checked by silence , save for the husky tune
et les marques bleues de ses baisers .
mr . bushel laughs , “ i ’m empty now ,
what man has made of man ?
et reperire deum nisi qui pars ipse deorum est ?
stern rugged nurse ! thy rigid lore
with admiration by the unenvying sun !
the sailor 's wife 's the happiest ,
accept from me this sheep - hook in exchange ;
of alle hem that trewe be .
qualem primo qui surgere mense
for i have found my love . "
as he gave his hand for sign ,
or we d , without the portion of reward ?
but ah withal ,
in one or two of those editions is to be found the title of " the
flung from the writing plow ,
five steep flights from the earth ,
" wherefore didst thou beget me ? i sought it not ! "
then trembled greece : the flight peneleus led ;
to care for such unfruitful things;--
large schooner accidentally alongside of us . she was one that was
by a brain ever brooding on evil ,
according to his prayer .
to the scouts ahead reconnoitering ,
nay , i know nothing ;
that bore the white cockade :
he was talking i recall , to lady lavinia dobson , renowned in two
chase every mote with radiance of her own ,
crushing the bone , and shatt'ring all the skull ;
in the heart - melting blink o ' my lassie 's blue e'e .
of scintilant dew ,
every storeroom crammed with treasure .
of youth is strong within ye at this hour ,
you fly high .   but what is it , in truth , you fly at ?
did letters writ by fools produce
first the brother silence broke ;
a hundred oxen were his price that day ,
where it daurna weel be seen ;
mad tywyssaisd dy lu , lloegr irdant ,
with a most voiceless thought , sheathing it as a sword .
desolate , desolate ! thy right hand in mine ,
hears and determines ev'ry private cause ;
y á nueva eterna gloria
with death . at moments , led astray , comes here
so weds these waters to the upper springs .
yet if i may pray a rajpoot lord
the one who stole her thence and fled away ,
but ' tis too late to turn this wrong to right ;
in stirring numbers of triumphal song
return ,
in the face and dress of a poem , and i must win a hearing
( coleridge : _ rime of the ancient mariner . _ )
was everywhere , by glade or sunny plain ;
that wakes the love of beauty in the soul ;
and court oth ' royall oake , where stood
long ago beloved , thy memory , atthis ,
no warder dared to ask :
leave then thy foolish ranges ;
great jove , averse our warfare to compose ,
oh , when weary , sad , and slow ,
from rest and sleep , which but thy picture be ,
that he mai dreme a lusti swevene ,
love gnaws my heart away ?
rising , dilating , reached across
sickening and faint , he gain'd the outer air ,
thou find'st she mocks my prayer ,
then doth the garden overflow .
o'er his buirdly shoulder laid ,
of water falling into the next round ,
it oft has been spoken , as oft has been penned
i begg'd for my master ,
what breast so cold that is not warmed here ?
the best man among them durst not touch her tail .
who cries in the lane .
leaps on and on , till burning with one flame ,
went on collecting more and more ,
wherever the queen sends him ? there 's a man
who kissest daily the pug and the reins and the paws
the nature , from its maker far estrang'd ,
" three wishes , my dear ! why , i scarcely knows
_ i charge o yee daughters of _ jerusalem _ , that yee stirre
uttering from his noble heart , through fear
if all were told .
forth came the babe , that when he left ,
the king with all his noblemen ,
that darkens the free light to man:--this heart ,
but the size of their addition was the balance of a doubt :
lights of the church , or guardians of the laws ?
the way resumed i on the desert slope ,
and the wind and the wave and the dew ;
the swallows built beneath the eaves ;
and right restor'd where right sud be ,
and thou hast made each step an onward one ;
todas de todos amadas ,
art thou thinking of our combat
when the story was completed ,
but the licht was like a broken trail
when he had called , throughout that whole assault
lies , far as the vision can fling ,
crusts to collect , or any pittance small
sweet is pleasure after pain .
from her husband detach'd itself slowly , with pain .
work apace , apace , apace , apace ;
see how the golden gateway
lieutenant colonel was at once promoted .
in yonder enemy 's fleet there is food enough
their ears and unbound me .
they sang , they swore , they plunged in haste ,
why not leave them all with jesus--
gally enough to ask my money back
the good sir walter , aptly named
atteste encore les exploits--
are hunted like a maukin !
pleine des pleurs et des sanglots du monde ;
in thrilling regions of thick ribbed ice .
could pace this street
punctually at the word " away , " my poor friend set off in a strong
new drawn frae the forth !
and his eyes were stars of scorn ,
perching motionless , alone ,
of whiche i spak of nou tofore .
alas , said i , what can they mean to do !
zohak , " the serpent king , " as he is now invariably called , was
a song may wake the echoes of the soul
with aim olympian ; bore
" for mine iniquities ,
and palisades about the trenches plac'd .
i 'm happy in thinking you 'll bring home a wife
wrath 's fierce attack , and slander 's slower art ,
who hold wise saws respected :
and to have exhausted mine in meeting them !
but mistress in my own .
  could no longer follow him distinctly .
i was always stiff and stubborn since i could recollect ,
involv'd th ' horizon , and the night her lot
to curse this world of ours ? but hold ! i blunder ;
clamorous and fearful , of the stormy hour ;
ein feuermeer umschlingt uns , welch ein feuer ! ...
soon after began the busy and important part of swift 's life .   he
_ lucretius , dante , and goethe sum up the chief phases of european
safe in science , bright with glory--
" if thou be able , utter forth thy voice . "
nor more or fewer years exist ; but all
billow - like heaveth ;
he has forgot to put away ,
the tempest blattered .
this is the mystery , palpable here and now .
i took the metro at saint lazare ;
that with a god have striven ,
so still they blaze , when fate is nigh
ther wase a dredfuaesaes fraye .
so the weather man took a palm - leaf fan
lictorem pro rege necans nunc mutius ultro
the ready measure rins as fine ,
will the water grow warmer for all that you 've said ?
he would bring but pain and sorrow ,
" the beast has been fighting with other jack - asses ,
unrestricted cult of divine personality , especially under an
fair were you in your nest .
for life 's bitter sake
he saw the sum of nature 's perfectness ,
a wig that flowed behind ;
and no one see me , no one overtake me .
hippolytus , when you , with ensignry
an outcast from existence ! and this spirit ,
thought a short life well lost for endless fame .
there stands on yonder high mountain
and ( if i dote not ) mark how one and all
to - morrow , when you shall be you no more .
in a blue dusk the ship astern
in death alone their miseries end ,
his roulades , appoggiaturas ,
if you had seen _ her _ , so fair and young ,
out of the land of bondage !   we have found
and soft winds swayed the umbles
down peaks of cloudy snow
that sort of worm in the clay ?
this was , indeed , a wilderness . "
like wine improves with age . go on , go on ,
i see beyond this island universe ,
as to pushkara obedient -- ever fall the lucky dice ,
on pleasures bent ,
( but we live in an age of rascal vice ) .
how shall i say it?--'t was as when one hath
and just about ten minutes after eight ,
when home from school he runs , till morn set free .
and all the land is lit with large desire
brain treasured up the whole :
bid me to weep , and i will weep
the better o ' the best o 's .
of ye
jean and marie responded by silently crossing themselves ; and the
like life whose essence is its friends .
then welcome midnight shades , when thy wish'd boon
no man possessing prizes such as mine
subido se había al alhambra .
destruction of those ancient irish monuments that i have written
twice a week the winter thorough
oh , these came back ,
  on the other side of the river towards arabia , over against the
again spoke one syllable--"wait . "
out of stone , and the wood of ida , in which bacchus hid a stolen
then godlike theoclymenus answered him : ' eurymachus , in
they charged onward . then on foot
through these long hours , nor call their minutes pains .
first made my rusty heart rejoice
to primroses
for weeks the sun , a pale and sinking ghost ,
" and -- and i am to go on with this -- this gipsy work ? " said leo .
of temporal quarrel , but the bastion old
and ' twas a luckless shade which sat and wept
and lashed his smoking steeds , and waved the whistling thong .
quite through the streets , with silver sound ,
thy fell request will i deny ,
in the air ,
in word and look that dear thou holdest me ? "
multi , roma , tuas laudes annalibus addent ,
that hides the glory past !
and where the parret ran .
have been the inventress of spinning and weaving . ]
" dear , on thy breast
and when their garments clung to them ,
towards the lofty castle planted there .
this from her finger , shaken in her seat ;
up to the starred goal of his heart ;
when bremly brened þose besteȝ , & þe breþe rysed ,
man we the tow'rs ; so harder were his task
what long repentance comes of love 's short pleasure ,
so slowly they receive the sum ,
where the hillside is sheer ,
the cultured , the careful , the chesterfield stars ,
since he had wrought that luckless marble maid .
that guard the ancient fortress of the soul .
render them all ; but oh , decide
from smithfield to st . pulchre 's shape their course ,
four long years of mingled feeling ,
whose arsenals with arms are stored ,
for then my work will all be done , my voyaging be past ,
soon to obtain , and long possess the prize :
to gete him paradis ayein :
for we 're going in to dinner , so make all the noise you can ,
shall tempt him forth into the haunts of men
fails with the dying year : not so does yours ;
now that heaven smiles in favor ,
jutland , and other lesser lands .
and your children play by sunny streams
in a circle brought us back .
his daring foe , at this prevention more
and dost prejudge thy bliss , and spoil my rest ;
the poor in spirit . those who have no idea of what is
that seem the very last drops from her heart .
that surely i can almost remember .
of those who disciplined the state of yore
of christian dallman , brow and pointed beard ,
panaque siluanumque senem nymphasque sorores .
a bosom true bring back !
that death nor heeds nor hears distress :
that neck that mocked the sandal scent ,
on his eyes have fed the whiting ;
tiny washer of the linen ,
i do not know a girl who ever knew .
and the affections is to be found in the writings of homer and
ground out the governor 's sixtieth birthday ,
we called our life when heaven was far away .
perchance from sorrow , that benignant sky ! "
it walked the moonlight like a homeless thing .
quod sum causa tuae viae ;
it would not seem polite , i know ,
walks along the streams and rapids
along our veins , after the work - day week
by humble heed of those who see the truth
an ' ay he gies the tozie drab
' tis the cloud and the mist of our own isle of showers ,
sat down to a gay table d'hôte ;
guide it with shepherding crook
abandon'd to delicious thought
by man is cursed alway .
and bend from their thrones of light ,
that shows itself therein , that formeth he ,
an ' the sick - list to the colonel makes ten more to - day .
nimbly , quoth he , a man 's fingers move
near the shore the mermaids play ,
that best of charleys , to spring his rattle .
while goes a swift omnibus by !
and the waterfalls of dreams ,
a gaunt carriage - horse gapes grumpily .
what is life -- and when it endeth
yet dried ere you distil your wine .
we are told besides that--
and pour glad thanks to all thy magic arts ,
all incorruptible would on his throne
and all life 's pleasures centre still
what 's passed between us . "
then , fearing lest his grief should hinder sleep ,
why did you fear to trouble my repose ?
voiceless and haunting , while the stars
expects me near yon barley - mow ;
if god commands it ,
life 's picture , varying with the year .
and in their wombe a tympanie doth rise
a tender heart , a loyal mind
on a hot day , in mowing , and against
athwart the noon - day 's ruddy glow ,
how shall i then describe my love ?
but i 'll big a bower on yon bonnie banks ,
makes their throats salty and enflames their thirst .
the sma ' , droop - rumpl't , hunter cattle
who , firmly holding field and wood ,
swing from the dim cathedral , and the fount
for my usual siesta ,
until the drunkest pours him down
when that deep blush _ would _ come o'er thee ,
her too in autumn turned a vintager ;
meek is thine eye and soft thy voice ,
and some still cry : _ " what is the use ?
all peter 's chains about his waist , his back
on the anvil of the world .
what is it that you say
ah , you are so great , and i am so small ,
and sweet birds ’ songs are loud ,
lift up the lad      alive from the altar ;
it dance as they go blowing by .
opening their skin from shoulders down to hips ;
" and made the captain strut a full inch higher ;
like a greeting from his spirit ,
and look'd around , if haply he might find
yet , all their wiles were neither there nor here !
and longs for the rest of death .
an ' waur than all -- my crownin ' sin -- rank blasphemy an ' wild .
and saw that no unhallowed line
" to yonder dreadful grove , " quoth he , " went i ,
" when swift returning to its home of love ,
“ hail to lovely umá !
fays , spunkies , kelpies , a ' , they can explain them ,
then the lively lemminkainen
the implacable republic will require ;
is great to grant , as mighty to make ,
ortwine of metz thus friendly sir rudeger address'd ,
his hold , but pass'd right on from him ,
laws silent for a space , and forums closed
an all - right tart with ginger ' air , and freckles on ' er nose ;
they sprawled in yellow daylight while he swore
my limbs i place ,
romance !   those first - class passengers they like it very well ,
that like along the finish'd line to feel
" thee whom high birth makes equal with the best
thus chanted the parae ;
no longer belch'd its thunder .
heaven frown'd -- dark vengeance lowering on his brows ,
when the world crowds up to the bar ,
and i sit and sing of the joyous spring ,
yellow -- a mast with a lantern , ten
this wretched woman thither goes ;
is our steep passage down the rocky height . "
we heard the winds and the waves roar !
without a single scudo of salario ;
to more gentility than others ; ' tis the same
all clad in golden armor ,
blow , bugle ; answer , echoes , dying , dying , dying .
however , bid 'em both come in ,
it pleased the longest , but at last the story
when wise ulysses , from his native coast
him whose service he daily needs , and whose property uses .
watching the long warm silent hours take flight ,
or mecca 's pilgrims , confident of fate ,
emptied and lost and swallowed up in thee .
gregory 's legacy to his daughters .
headless men , that walk the heavens ,
and secret smile .
ye shall live , and live forever
thy pleasures stay not till they pall ,
alas ! and why is not the champion near ,
fifty years lit with its rays --
scarce peep the wee
when spoils by lot the victor shall obtain-
into the chambre and forth thei wente .
with ours , thy care and ardour are the same ,
to shun a tyrant father 's hate--
and wondered , doubted , hoped , or cursed myself ,
like some wild thing , the stubborn dame ,
then knew the wretched king all folk had heard
in the covert of the pine - trees
with all their various aptitudes , until i call ? "
cumber thee not for the world , and this my precept forget not ,
as oft he rises , ' midst the twilight path
and not get reverend and unreverend _ mixed _ .
the fall of others from like state of bliss ;
of clothes and of good atir
" yea , this shall be the sign of them ,
grow stiff beneath the golden hands of light .
lighten upon him ; and his false heart quailed
ah ! she once had such a happy smile !
so shall their loves be crown'd with due delights ,
and lilacs ' fragrance on the air
no wish can gain them , but the gods bestow .
the huntress , on aeneas sent to wait ,
that doith to him seruyse ,
they are born among the hills in the high places ,
special acknowledgments are due to the following publishers and
amazed at noisy kissing
clove through the stubborn panoply to the flesh ,
hooked around , i thought i saw
and roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps .
upon the raised platform , where the chests stood in which the
in his cold wiry prison ? let him fly ,
there sought the queen 's apartment , stood before
even as candle - flames
she responds , she understands .
do i bring for thy protection !
well i knew that in the day
revoked all his former words of sympathetic admiration and in his
heavenly incognita !
' late , late , sir prince , ' she said , ' later than we ! '
t ' naation still seeams discontent ,
shadowed from either heel with feathered mail ,
the horrible example . touched by thine ,
vpon the percyes ; calling to their ayde
" i am a boxer ! " here and now i pray
" yet a word before we part ,
the message of a juvenal .
upon the british ocean .
that to his royal tent the monarch bring ,
the world i once inhabited , constrains me .
led from the territory of false limours
what our wise philosophy
i 've been in spain and poland ,
peace , the lovers are asleep .
spake this:--from sodomite to peri
we are next to the sky .
he turned to the west his eye :
rais'd by the boiling , in one mighty swell
weep over him , tears of woman ,
who told him , scouring still , ' the sparrow - hawk ! '
proud o ' the height o ' some bit half - lang tree :
in haste . but venus round them on the way
and then thou must be damned perpetually !
the shepherds at those tidings
the conwasation short ;
good - night , dear friend !   i say good - night to thee
at last the dead man walked no more
but fate doth so alternate the design ,
and for the suffering and the strife ,
and twenty - nine is the worth of thee ,
thrilled into jocund life , the dreaming dells
to think her part was done ,
a yonder to all ends .
dipt in the trough . the cavern floor below
they flew , and flying , left sad death behind .
--the miller never missed his flour ,
_ chorus . _ see his horn'd face , and dy for shame :
here upon the prairie
his poems held a noble rank , although it 's very true
his olifant he sounds with grief and pain ;
and the sun 's face , uprising , overshadowed
with pickens , bruce and locke of classic dell ,
painful , too , is boiling water ,
sagging from your indifference of mind ;
their every step betray'd .
i ever saw,--and all my own,--
what help , what counsel , what most dear caress ?
blest in death and life beyond man 's guessing
to the village went kyllikki ,
when she said that she should study elocution in the fall !
and shall i mix in this unhallow'd crew ?
his friends , who came so quickly , he did not spare to thank .
the body of the king was set
be well contented , if i here break off ,
with huge hands , and rob from jove his kingdom immortal .
on de top canada gray ;
uninjured and unawed ;
ismena led thee through , with thy proud flight
" it 's for slaying of the king 's fallow deer ,
as friend with friend , or husband with wife ,
" as i be linkt with thee or thine !
tell my giovanna , that for me she call
the yards buckled and bent , man could not speak .
with a tremendous bang ,
the wheel beside the mill ,
and sing my _ alma genetrix _
falls from the wings of night ,
william j. lusk , in sixty - seven ,
it is some dream that on the deck
to grace the frantic thyrse ;
in its sorrow shuns caresses .
ever i fought in the front of all ,
the high that proved too high , the heroic for earth too hard .
of vaine worlds glorie , flitting too and fro ,
_ duke _ . but was there not a great feast to - night ?
your longing heart held in store ,
and suns and universes ceased to be ,
which were entrusted with the care
through the fens he went rejoicing ,
then the cry that knows not law .
of which the paleface settlers love to tell ;
we can give them an answer , not relish'd by some ,
by these presents you shall know
thou , who ( if looks , that used to speak the heart ,
to don him compaignie a nyht :
de rosa y jazmín ,
raised his voice above the waters ,
and fierce the tempest rolling
( as cromwell had done before ) those vermin should sit there no
look -- on the leafy carpet
to tread their festal ring ; and last the band
good - night , dear , pretty , baby moon !
to fickle chance , and chaos judge the strife :
the brook that babbles by ,
strike you as on the bum--
to send for the fairy spoonman ,
all further question , in my form behold
' twas every thing that young hearts feel ,
she fell a victim to diana ’s bow .
touch from yon altar my poor mouth 's desire ,
o love , on your bare , white breast .
and as i looked a quickening gust
like a winged fairy dream ;
which fondly feeds a hope so vain ,
mist drew off from his mind , sun scattered gold ,
who , fulfilling in turn the same fearful conditions ,
respiciunt tantum , et strepero procul agmine pergunt .
den coom to kit de money pack all over in de toun . "
so , to - day , as lives the bloom ,
this saw his hapless foes , but stood obdur'd ,
such sweet melodies may fall ?
but promise me that thou wilt leave off weeping ,
save when our rippling laughter let it rest ;
of _ stated rules _ ; let those direct your course .
not anything know we of your human state .
yet there , even there tho ' slyly laid ,
the better blows are those from durendal . "
there is no vacant chair .   to love is still
where , if they find no brandy to get drunk ,
one rides down the dusty road , one watches from the wall ,
unto your images ; my reverent sight
your tribes , and water from the ambrosial fount ?
sits in his jasmin'd porch , and takes the sun :
faces of welcome seem crowding the shore--
e'er can have the slightest notion
the offending females to that task we doom ,
out of those wallowing , moon - flecked waves
benethe forth among ous hiere
with earnest eyes , and round unthinking face ,
my tongue it doth chatter , and goes pitter patter ,
to cleave our webs , run lightnings through our cloud ;
to out - root his race and kingdom ;
would that they were indeed to be dissolved
and now at last , the fatal voyage o'er ,
fought ' twixt loch katrine and achray .
so we took to wine and drink and other things ,
aeuro ~ fuaesaes weaesaes thy men~ , lord , the grett ,
the shadow and the burden of the night ;
an easy thing like this to yield my breath ,
spectator , an quæ fabula prodii
were poor to this , that chariot of the sun
for he sold more meat for one peny
if time to - day has had his flight ,
our dust , that at one draught , mortality
and bade it grace this bleak and barren hill .
' twas in the rugged and forsaken isle
i cain't git used to city ways--
cross words is nigh as useless as a porpus in the trawl . "
and if they should discover your disguise ,
nay , not a dream nor ghost ,
then must ahti saarelainen ,
quoth famous henry then ,
sarga the third -- krishna troubled
how long , o lord ! how long , o lord ! how long
a madman and in hell ? "
whenever they part there is death !
the same to the same .
but lord , thou know'st i am but weak ;
just as queer !
a hag surrounded by crockery - ware ,
you may well know what grief was his . he spurs
  _ the joy of the fleet on the homeward departure from india._--we
and read his mail , more letters , articles
the gay green woods amang , man ;
of faces and of forms ;
the inconsolable night - bird weeping through
of nectar as in heaven is quaffed :
the starry aspects are not all benign ;
( a free metrical rendering in the wisdom of the east series . )
observe the very nowt an ' sheep ,
i had a weary , fruitless search ,
but the cruel rocks , they gored her side
as dead or maid or wife ,
for though her eyes were soft , a ray
the lady 's velvet gown was torn ,
yet in her cheek the hues are bright ,
departing , therefore , he admonish'd oft
( little wild baby , that knowest not where thou art going ,
meditation .
she also had a twilight tinge of ' blue , '
nine acres he o'erspread , and , at his side
their hanging hair is blue . their torrent swim
where as those folys haue often cause to wayle
o ' drivin ' cares away !
and on the many marvels gazed her fill ,
of salem village ; by which wicked arts
a heathery land and misty sky ,
that night the virgin was no further pray'd .
and , sitting there , held converse sweet with thee .
i suppose you are having an excellent time just now .
it was a courteous stranger - man that gave it unto me ,
roses white and red are best !
how solemn as one by one ,
than that he had loved another maiden .
only beware lest , in disguise of friendship
how shall the summer arise in joy ,
that engulphing , ghast , sinister place -
to scorch the army in his ire :
also known as lemminkainen ,
around me flitted unnumbered swarms
easily could i then obtain
of lazy nurse , who snores the sick man dead ,
not what they saw , but what they wish'd to see :
the horses , mares , and frisking fillies ,
if i could kiss a rosy , restless foot ,
we will drink the wine of heaven
wakes the child and speaks these measures :
that humble cottage , some fresh toil to brook ;
of this right hand provok't , since first that tongue
then fades , as if afraid , into her tender eyes .
and at length the hair be lying still
because all constraint that might have bowed our
i came to weep -- so sorrowful was i
the goodly pannier framed of osiers gray ;
of that dire war ; hera rejoiced on high ;
affliction than any other woman of my age and country .   first i
for he 'll never see my body mair ,
as e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted
" dissolved are her spells when a doubt is but spoken ,
" sine labe originali concepta "
and arts of men the heart of man suffuse ,
to - night , to those who wait , take home a smile .
" they were so cowering , shivering , white
" i wha sae late did range and rove ,
then ' ere 's to the lodge o ' the widow ,
" to earn some money ,
and will as well his panoply forego ,
he strayed through alleys soft and green ;
to make thy son ayodhyá ’s king ,
" in the bird's - nests of the forest ,
nor peace nor ease the heart can know ,
and dances with the daffodils .
and never standeth in one certaine state ,
behind us we perceived , i and my sages .
when forty days are passed and gone ,
that song : till ceas'd the trembling , and the song
dim with a dull imprisoned ray ,
that would break his heart .
of bitterns and fish - eating stoats .
those things
while the flaming blade of battle slumbers in
and blast the rash beholder 's gaze .
oh ! not so sweet the siha thorn
that now these bloody wars may cease ;
whither sir aldigier 's advices teach ;
and the billow roar reply.--
pressed down on heart and brain-
you think my life debarred all rest or pleasure ,
_ holman hunt _ and 6 illustrations after the original ms . with
the maid young lady , and the mother i
borne in a beauteous litter rode ,
but ' tis no gout , believe it , but hard beer ,
seu te maligno sidere degener
he can requite thee ; for he knows the charms
notwithstanding all the entreaties of the norwegian king that he
his hands , wipe valor 's tablets clean ,
ah ! who can tell ?
at length the active warriors could brook no more delay .
who perished in fever swamp and fen ,
on and onward was borne the blast ,
a right to woman not allowed--
" i have not summoned you , my friends , " he said , " in order that ye
that might be prejudicial to ourselves .
we stand unbroken in our places ,
of us out - cast , exil'd , his new delight ,
the other close behind it spluttering spake ,
through
as yit for oght that ye me tolde ,
dusky red beneath the ashes ,
tho ' all other happy hours
" ev'n thus some infant , in the early spring ,
( as dream to unknown dream in sleep ) ;
there now the ioy is his , here sorrow mine .
cherished within our pious mother 's breast ,
for that restlessness -- piere set to keep
dey had biano - blayin ' :
approaches it in merit ; and , though i dislike the imitations of
the law of order , discipline ,
the joy of hearing , seeing ,
though in this glare of pomp you take no part
" woe to thee , ilios ! the fire , the fire ! and rain ,
in guise of theatre the town extended
and all that nymphs deluded prize     }
and in those weaker glories spy
he may embosomd bee and loved best ;
and still another in endlesse repedation ,
to see him as he is . a nameless thing ,
the afflicted spirits of that husband strove ,
passage , " it is not the attic δείλη ὀψία , with which it has been
they fish all day the weedy mud ,
promised them more advantages , and talked
the great cod quivering from the deep
list to the wise , and let madmen bide . "
a fish in the sea ,
than these absorb his leisure .   no doubt straying
this is the gospel of labor , 53 .
that for a hermitage ;
sudden a cry was heard -- the cry that should o - shichi doom .
first a strong , clear faith to show ,
he is a chief of high degree ,
i hoped a soldier 's fame ,
the sun , though flaming still and hot ,
like a shadow on a lily .
god will help thee bear what comes
your kingship to bespatter ;
dirge ; there thou wouldest not have seen an argive but
i 'll make no question if thy skill
therefore with prayer of thine sometimes assist me .
i saw bright flags awaving
builds up proud and airy castles ;
the sun came dazzling thro ' the leaves ,
and scented breezes gently sway
lean down from thy fair height of peace , and teach me
oh , who would keep a little bird confined ,
and valor seem'd to fire his breast
my law it is in pleasure 's paths to stray ,
is in that gladsome harbour , to our tribe
i shall bear a mighty hero ,
as she that knewe the clene entencion
ne yit the mone , that sche carie
thy forest , windsor ! and thy green retreats ,
of the fair land in all its breadth and length ;
el pecho de cristal .
rest quietly , sweet child ,
that he shall sing to - morrow for all men ,
en sus cuytas todavía ,
o'er pleasure 's pure , perpetual , placid stream .
to odysseus and to godlike diomede ;
open , and see all things plain :
no guardian lion by her side doth move ,
and when she knew and felt the slower tread
means aught of eyes whose brooding splendour swept
thou rood of every day !
the moon on the breast of the new - fallen snow
and tumbled down into a hole ;
wilson 's warnings wasted , world war wild ,
true guide of every stage ,
shine thou in me , clear and bright ,
once , after hearing them , i wrote it down .
rome -- rome -- now pagan ; but a power unknown
takes that as thanks for all he 's given .
gladly the wretch would spare .
once , the salt i have to live on
when on commanding love the blame is thrown .
beauty forever dares to widen and retrace
therefore on thee we call , o mother , for we are thy sons .
and willed her go whither and when she list ,
shine cinthia like with iewels in the night ,
a row of poplars darkly rose behind ,
full of the feared sight which late they sawe .
now hath it this , now hath it sche ;
" if _ you must needs _ for ceremonie 's sake
one of the " poems of the imagination . "--ed .
here born of danae and the golden shower ,
skilful anglers hide their hooks , fit baits for every season ;
some say they are the ghosts of children unbaptized , who are to
fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart ?
the burn brawls darkly down the shaggy glen ;
pervading some of the sketches in this volume is more
and after mony a bloody , deathless doing ,
and steel so strong , beneath its weight a mule
already , and the crew stand all prepared .
quickly rising in his snow - sledge ,
necktie and bosom and wristbands a wreck ,
might redeem myself by reading you this little
and cheer the orphan lass and lad ;
for the bells themselves are the best of preachers ;
o     oxyrhynchus papyri 873 ( 3rd cent . ) .
if but a waft the well - known gust conveys ?
into thy spirit burned ,
magic minstrel , beer - enchanter ,
who spends the hours for toil ordained
watching him , passes her hand rapidly over her brow and eyes ,
my girl awake to run the race
for their armies were spent in the unequal strife ,
counting the hours ' dreary sum
through which one sees , perhaps , the trees of a wood , and these
gladly for thy happy voyage ; fortune
at the order " load ! "
for the day of the dawn of the roses ,
poison with the falling dews ,
as through an arch the violent roaring tide
upon orca 's howling steep ,
at hands of noble ladies / fairest greeting then was seen .
here might recall them -- six thousand feet on high !
i sing the more , that thou hast one
and humbly lay at his dear feet
spars hand through hand , and tempts to the attack ,
we fought the fight in detachments ,
' tis paid with sighs a plenty
“ of nutriment parental ? did thy bulk ,
he thought to see me tremble
wherein a few , unfairly blest ,
and knew her rearing , schooling , knew the air
of power , and their own weakness hide ,
a cottage in the quiet shade ,
he was in church a noble ecclesiast .
and thick - branched trees diffused a leafy gloom ,
better go ' _ round ! _ better go ' _ round ! _ better go ' _ round , _ "
round a candidate to whom the fates allot
or by the prompting of some heav'n - taught seer ,
and knocked my business to the dogs ,
but salomon packed his heart with dreams ,
all her spectres pale to me ;
the angel raised his hand and looked and said ,
be ready , thou for me , to wait upon her ,
a still renewable fear . . . o love , o troth . . .
in the land of the white rabbit .
until it pleas'd the word of god to come
nor yet -- of all bird - song should glorify--
let sherman , the stern old general ,
th . ebdome e ton protreptikon .
yet he did not long continue in this seclusion , before he was
to me that cup has been dealt in another measure .
the camping - grounds are green ;
the love - sick vestal of the old " frasciti " ;
and rest ye at " our lady 's house of woe . "
he will not , therefore , rule the gods too long .
the river with its golden canes
poor little white crow ! though a " fisher of men , "
the dense crowd pours and at the doors unfurls .
loue - scorcht enamored ( so restles ) now ween
when people walk abroad ;
even to the gods above us ! "
and then you go straight to sleep .
that fills the air
when plevna fell ?
enmendémonos todos de jazmines ,
i am weary , weary , weary ,
are come together in kinder years ,
unless the strength of heaven , if you mean that ?
way ; but i can tell you a man whose house you can go to -- i mean
the blade and leaf and blossom die ,
flowed forth the peach - fount river along its bed of silver sand ;
never fight yet , in which all were of equal prowess -- there is now
at the first glancing of an amourous looke :
and hop - o'-my - thumb , whose influence in high places
general . to aggregate and to associate , to evoke and to combine ,
and hear the wild roar of their thunder to - day !
and startled the pigeons from their perch
the lightning 's fearful and enchanted rays ;
who has asked thee for thy presence ?
augustus to charlemagne " , vol . i.p.240 , who describes these
the other wooded , thick and quite obscure
of ráma and the throning spoke .
lay for long hours . and on the third night saw
and hoary time 's quick - whirling wheel ,
then pete crouched down from head to hams ,
that spring by spring the earth shall still be beautiful ,
where -- in a different dream from theirs--
i pray to god to give his soul good rest .
a little smuggling , and some piracy ,
yet how can i forget the sight
for dawn for fuller life , the day a time
have never taken wings .
made more or less by thy continual haste .
in this silent courtyard the collector lives .
and thus began :   " francesca !   your sad fate
where a heart still beat for thee , beloved .
for as i lie here , hours of the dead night ,
no hopeless hope , no loss beyond repair ,
i can not lift my hands
then , by lime - spar and rock - crystal !
him , who embodied in the palfrey goes ,
' oh , what about the sleeper you promised to show us ? ' dan cried .
a something leaked out ;
and burned his rood
tok out mor cold than eny keie
que el que los rige libres sólo es fuerte ;
then cannie , in some cozie place ,
what , lord , would i not give to shift my cares and lie
to winne of love his lusti yifte .
with prescient yearnings pierce the core of earth ,
if one haue plenty of treasour and ryches
leaving the little face again serene .
" there are no terms we can suggest
three lovely children who loved christ alway ,
are all thy lights , and cold my wrinkled feet
if the powerful beams that fly
instead of that , you tell me that you are
his grooms were all puritan , traytor , and witch ,
the trade of a soldier 's the only trade worth plying ;
to a heart in port , --
the touch of the satiny skin ,
i have beheld the sarrazins of spain ;
or murmuring trills of mountain - rills ,
when some uncommon dread is near .
with nature 's happiest power .
i want those hearbe 's and rootes of indian soile ,
among the crags and splinters of the rock ,
for damzels fit to decke their lovers bowres .
love 's legacy
a youth on a mantle of satin ,
only the bishop walks serene ,
the harmony is far too great ,
a widow now most desolate ,
caelum nitescere , arbores frondescere ,
i 've heard with pain , but oh ! the tale pursue ;
when my brothers fall around me ,
one night when jack frost whispered zero ,
when the woods are standing in liveries green and gay ,
the thing i seek is far ;
that her dress he thus did rumple , / avenged the lady grievously .
and ever since he tells his beads ,
at length a comrade brave , alcimedon ,
  see the first aeneid .
so , when she fell into the pond ,
they took up a roll and some camomile tea ,
with blood and fire along its van ,
the earth is turned a grey cathedral close ,
" now guard you well , ye valiant / nibelungen all .
our sorrows flee fast away
without the brags of fortune , or his blood .
so sup'rabundant joy shall be
till we ran the french to earth with all the rest !
  an old alphabetical catalogue of wills in the hereford registry ,
for his feet had lost their toe - nails ,
made roland through each chamber , far and near ,
i left the kind memorial safe at home .
ah ! little at best can all our hopes avail us
but this is what seems hard for me to see ,
as , when ye fled , your cause .   the consuls ' power
nor the dawning of the morning ;
and get our " cakewalk " money .
one longing for my heart , one thirst :
through the fearful agony of hell .
then irresistibly it lives , it works ;
from thee we come , to thee we go , and why
and bless me , mother , ere i go . "
in that blessed hour .
for ages on the deep :
his mantle hairy , and his bonnet sedge
her step a little faltered , but her face
about thirteen miles west of linz .
he may scare 'em wi ' taxes , wi ' rates , an ' oppression ,
it is enacted by the statute fell ,
and , for a little while , we know
ipse sono tenui dixit , " elissa , veni ! "
near to kaleva 's own fountain ,
there was a coracle all of lard
doth duty now expect me
upon the gleaming snows . and as i looked
by their manhood 's right divine
with engines of their craft to read the thing ;
approach'd not nearer .   when my eyes were fed
is libya ; yet by winds and sky she yields
he played his flute like leaves or snowflakes falling ,
country [ he is speaking of italy ] , where the pastoral age begins
but ours the dead that faced the sun .
within my breast there lives a choking flame--
and pour at once the torrent of his soul.--
a boon i dearly prize ) if any soul
.     .     .     .     .     .     no , he wil on ,
endless , and no solution will be found :
he had seen , he said , a water
an ebon mass : methinks thou piercest it ,
and presaging the truth of visioned bliss .
he hail'd , and boasted , as prophetic truth ,
is not our scorn of safety , health , and ease ,
good charlemagne to neither party bends ;
tune--"_jockey 's ta'en the parting kiss . _ "
had some brave champion of the sandy field
the brook beside her talked as water will
each rock reflects a softer light ,
i 'll write , an ' that a hearty blaud ,
this earth ? reciprocal , if land be there ,
with joyful spirits , blithe and gay ,
has sent the brutes to coventry till monday?--
the scaly fry , and feather'd brood ?
dares to stay in my dominions ,
which seems to come like lava from thy throat ?
that i may prepare the fish - net ,
this good old man must die !
the king would strike my shoulder
both slingsby , gerard , and hewet , ( 83 ) were sure enough to go to
but oh , my frail immortal soul
then the whole host pours in , not o'er the walls
and dance out thy heart for him alone
that grants to envy room to make its nest .
the news at once , and let him hear it from her . "
for it grows and it grows , as though leaping
wi ' sma ' fatigue .
have you marked the finger - tip
lort help me mit my war to prove
cloot , mend , patch .
into the crane 's broad bosom , splits its own
and look through the door at the things to eat !
her mammets they swill ,
both were mine !   life went a - maying
i naturally had her drowned .
ye oghten wel above alle
for since to part your will is ,
cause you with eager eyes to stop ,
( english voice , months later):--
shall i now enchant this maiden
while overhead that silver ship , the moon ,
and michael shifted feet , and creakings took the floor .
and would not pass away !
drop suddenly collaps'd , if the mast split ;
griev'd that his race he knows ; griev'd his request
and two playful children on a train .
" if my herdsman prove unworthy ,
true to the grand deposit trusted there ?
thus arose the poison - monster ,
and life more like a holiday .
" ups and downs " ( subsequently re - named " the squatter 's dream " ,
till his life was sorely broken .
they shared the social meal , nor lacked there aught .
_ ador . _ the cross -- the cross !
her aspect and her attitude ,
and smil'd i ' th ' babe 's bright face ; the purpling bud
while its ruddy fires are gleaming ,
then must thou range wide seas and distant lands--
wind from off the flower - crowned branch hath shaken
the ensign on the mountains here behold !
" is virtue , then , and piety the same?"--
temporis magnam spolium reportans
it hain't no use to grumble and complane ;
and to another gives as good as none :
each in its silken coverlet .
to hear the lark begin his flight ,
has bid such strife depart .
to slay him ere he come to his own country . but this ,
this drives them constant to a certain coast .
sinks bleeding on the ground .
basking through the drowsy summer
" come , let the college stand , my dear black lambs--
his purple wings flit once across thy smile .
hyp .   thank you again .   lie there , good chrysostom ,
stout[a ] warwickshire , her ancient badge the beare ,
whom we shall cherish , whom to cast away .
oh ! give me a home .
each child in campagnatico , can tell .
ev'n at their vessels ' sterns to urge the war ,
cantharus , et recubans sub eodem marmore chiron .
if the hare i could but follow
for love , for life , thou know'st not what,--
ethereal , and as lowest first the moon ;
" and cry to all good men that loved you well ,
to purge my crime , in daring to be free .
fear not . and one thing mark : before
matthew paris's[f ] story with horror is read--
rapt to the boat was magnus , of himself
may calling life to joy , and youth to love ;
to protect it from all foemen ,
had priam issued ; therefore heaping high
the dangerous craft of culling term and phrase
perchance our meeting next may fall
so beautifully innocent and pure .
and let her heart be still'd .
for the robbing of his fish - nets .
and feigned to trust in his fidelity .
' o quam laetus eras , vitalis ' dicite maesti ,
to sarza 's moody cavalier replied :
my own free choice , be quaff'd with resolute will ,
is seen to join its knees unto its breast ,
when the winds are breathing low ,
he laughed , “ the beauty it enshrines . canst claim
but i behold , above him ,
an ' every bloomin ' campin'-ground exactly like the last ;
yet still he waited , hoping -- wondering if
" oh , hasten , get your guilty soul
notwithstanding every effort to save them . all my people besides ,
when deed of danger was to do .
before the old peshawur gate , where kurd and kaffir meet ,
and nile 's seven mouths , disturbed with fear ,
led the mighty host of rowers ,
they are like camels in a line
" then , that the will of heaven be duly brought
the tattered rags of every vest ,
and he himself , begarlanded with olive clippèd close ,
the roses in her hair were green and blue .
poema in hunc modum incipit .
the shrewd little bulrush answered , " friend ,
the archbishops declare , frightened out of their wits ,
poets there are who wear the floor out ,
to end me ? shall truth fail to keep her word ,
that all men thereof nourished shall praise thee
nor busies her to trim the cot :
o'er the earth 's green blur with its silver tracing
o wind , that sings so loud a song !
as fast and faster still they fall .
that streak blue glens with amethyst .
then will i weep , in anguish weep ,
he spake , and vanished , mingling with the winds .
i think i had better go .
remainder seemed to be in the rabbinical dialect . all trick or
thou art mine eldest sonne and heire :
upon some far - off happier sea--
joy , that transcends all sweetness of delight .
our parting was all sob and sigh--
their zest with qualms to see ,
but then i have done nothing to deserve
* desque * , desde que .
who stung them with a poisoned bone .
the devilish pack from rules deliverance boasts .
a man prepar'd for speech .   him all our haste
and these , who 'd bid you welcome , go forth yourselves to meet .
his willow wreath away ;
--this is that happy morn ,
when that they might rest them / and to their beds be shown .
range on its pinions till the soul must deem
' twas not a grey , bare head , like thine ,
thoughts of the world , whose longing eyes
which doubly feasts us , being so refin'd ,
ye blushing virgins happy are
blind in the sun , we struggle on with fate
for him , outstretched beneath a lonely rock ,
ne other knowledge ever did attaine ,
confront the calumny and foul report
' hic est vietus , vetus , veternosus senex,'--
storied of old in high immortal verse
bitterer than the stars ' decrees are ,
thirty of the thanes , and thence he rushed
and right me , sometimes , when i turn aside ,
to the song can compare      not the sound of trumpet ,
serenely placid , safely true ,
his soul from sorrow freed ;
unexampled : witness the " aside " in the wife of bath 's
his cours he nam with seil updrawe ,
" _ love , my love_"--these the words i read--
with brandy quench'd his thirst , and fell asleep .
there , that is our secret : go to sleep !
battr'y three , you always see at
as bones of men under the deep sharp sea .
lord help me thro ' this warld o ' care !
to call me home to tea .
to welcome him . the nobler part
and so the world of curs let him alone .
then , with a bitter triumph in his face ,
now that your face is gone !
as a love - sick serenader ,
half willing , half reluctant to be led ,
eight different sorts of rose i own ,
whould " consumedly ache " on the morrow .
hear no music on the waters . "
" mr . cagley , a member from yorkshire , " says the " london times , "
i can not wait longer , i 've waited so long ,
she is so strange,--so strange,--so strange !
with oathes great he was so sworn adown ,
thus plutus with his clucking voice began ;
well , by the dog ! it makes me bilious !
shuddered and trembled , and all humankind
that far beneath us bore of old
the next rich honorary gift be thine :
to my mad youth her gentle surveillance
ye may tak ' ten -- before folk .
he said , or thought ; then upwards clomb .
take thy - courser to the stable ,
to bring to men a higher life or death ;
and by peach orchards and vineyards .
he was coming on like a god for a time , then , o patroclus , was
yet with soft love a gentle belle he charms ,
the seas their fish leave naked on the strand ,
ten thousand fishes play , and deck his pleasant stream . ]
i have held converse with large things ;
of my life 's warfare ever seek thy face ?
blurring the panes . ben gripped the old man 's arm ,
the blackest sin is clear'd with absolution ;
the king tho hield him noght wel paied ,
we enter'd -- and scarcely had bob , with an air ,
with griefe of mournefull great mishap opprest ,
and say to those whose feeble souls would lean ,
hence every state to one lov'd blessing prone ,
" hath so inveigled me , that i from speech
as an eagle i will follow . "
and just and good my father ’s deed .
drenched in the everlasting cold of death .
so sternklar war die nacht .
to men of larger reach ;
achilles slays hector .
so , to my mind , amyntas yields to you .
will often live in one small cottage ,
approaching gross and huge ; in hollow cube
when bloody tragedies like this are acted ,
glorify these whose very life i doubt ?
carol'd above the stream :
finger the lock of the tea - set box .
through thy sev'n regions ; for which best thanks
and growing grey at last , the barley bowed
the king presents to him his right hand glove ;
on his return from europe , mr . lowell occupied the chair which he
and yet do what thou can'st to hide ,
birthplace of the tyrant azzolino , or ezzolino , whom dante had
and folk'll gallop at his nod .
“ when they do n’t find us here,--
till it is time to go to bed .
long arms , hands wrought in glorious wise ,
my heart is on the point of cracking .
but such mannerisms , which abound in plautus , are extremely
to leanness doom'd .   attentively i turn'd ,
architecture and for the landscapes around it .
expos'd behold him . "   on his face was mine
at the three rhodian artists , by whose hands
for a forward foot and a tongue of fire :
" suppose these four to be the four evangelists , but i should
going all alone has met with them , they use no disguise ,
when driven to flee the lashings of the winds
horses and robes were scatter'd with ever open hand .
from hence , ye beauties , undeceived ,
geist came next , our little friend ;
must suffer change , disdain'd not to begin
blow , one by one , until the bare stalk cowers ,
i would not from this threshold fly
- next door , where dwelt a heart fresh stirred ,
is the dread sceptre and dominion dire
how many things a child may do
milk , when from thy bed arising ,
and starts me in the dark .
his late travelling companion , now passing before
i think it right to mention that ,
your message was written in bright letters across black .
he mentioned his poultry , and mentioned his pigs ,
of all the rebel sons of fire ;
lying , prostrate in the meadow ,
thou shalt beare me a blowe .
we sate us down , and up did swallow
" tomatoes en okra
that the steed may not be wearied ,
dance in a giddy whirl and sing .
counsel . take then the whip and reins , while i go down from the
honey is the food of strangers .
to the palace roof 's high terrace -- to behold the king of men .
y al mar dejando que á sus pies alabe
hide in the cherry boughs ,
as tho was in that yle there .
of mead , thou liest for jove to sup ,
hour of retribution is so certain , that it may be considered
" when will love come "         pakenham beatty
then mounted mirth , on gleesome wing
no shadow lieth here at all ;
cernis , an ad siluas quae respicis , aula , tacentis ,
the story of the rape of proserpine has caused much inquiry among
and no men kiss your hands -- your fragile hands
were it the priceless pearl hid in the land ,
these valleys broad to us are dear ,
in that narrow cabin 's circuit -- nala wandered here and there ,
the inspiration for this quatrain comes from o. 19 .
drawing their rainbow wings through involutions
conspicuous , and , in bright apparel clad ,
he thought her a bore , she thought him an ass .
and the friends of the sabbath _ must _ speak out .
private debates , etc . , of the rump , " 4to , april 2 , 1660 , we read ,
come gushing forth , the trusty north ,
she answered , " that great sign it is god loves thee ;
clashes with all my counsels from of old .
and such eclipse in heav'n methinks was seen ,
and the rain seemed never - ending .
action for at least three months , at length tore asunder every
kisses were the only coin
upon a mortal mould of clay ;
heroes                         _ edna dean proctor _
drew her soft hand from his , and dared the deep .
a parting song to summer , sad , soft ,
i tremblingly decipher , as they wind ,
the fearless of heart , and the mighty of arm .
now tom would be a driver and maria go to sea ,
in eden garden . have , get , before it cloy ,
purposed unfoldments of deeds i had sown for her
so don , ye knights , your armor , / and guard ye well your life .
singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs .
but the raven , sitting lonely on the placid bust , spoke only
who being lovely was so wise ,
minced - pies and plum porridge ,
o're other creatures ; yet when i approach
no warbler to lend her a lay ,
in earth his mighty body lay ,
and the seaward haze ,
coarse robes he gave her , and her lips he fed
for like a whirlwind on the ramparts pour'd
a harlequin to a teacher ,
that care to man belongs , and most to me . "
upon the blushing lips could cling ?
but add a solemn grandeur to the scene.--
rem'men .    the father of the hop - vine .
are things to love ? with _ these _ my soul is brimmed ;
i give you my notions .   form yours and reflect .
opened and -- closed . . . .   yet something of the clear ,
to hear the wild bees and see the merry spring again .
of medical virtues ; nay ev'n and _ their _ little impulse
the world for self , if it were all in vain .
victoria 's praise ,
some freshly opening flower of thought ,
and the waters rushed in wildly while she paused upon the brink .
each branch , wide - spreading to the ambient sky ,
the roses , red and white ,
on small adventures in the wild ,
of jupiter and soster eke ,
sinks the sad autumn day .
nay , i 'll not give my fiddle
is never to suffer defeat ;
tho ' humble as can be--
fenced round about with _ the lord thus saith _ ;
in the bondage of that tribe
" they are like white faces speaking
did your good father gain a livelihood?"--
and like an artisan , bending down
is wider than some wave - relinquished pool
in the stable is a manger
in sun - bright armes and battailous array ;
one of the solid margins bears us now
you of the painted face ,
he never stays so long ,
hand the clergymen jine their ands .
one typographical error was corrected :
that cold bed where i lodgèd be ,
and over it softly her warm ear lays
else thou alone could'st win me out of hell .
thine eyes are wild -- tempt not the wrath divine !
arcs are radiant opals
and her heart is the shape of a leaf .
never thought on my departure ,
his wodbynde watȝ away , he weped for sorȝe ,
as deep as capricorne , to bring in change
nor think _ golfinia 's _ train below the muses ' care .
and bid the foemen enter , if they dare .
an hour - glass ,
but besides the direct action of outward things on the senses , he
leading a barren heifer for the wooers and fatted goats .
its voice the voice of the brooding dove .
there lies the slime !
and those two children dear ,
the white - walled garden i had ruled
in arms not worse , in foresight much advanc't ,
_ medea . _     of thee ? i 'd have thee dare the law .
so strong a pity for myself appears ,
that being lovely was a duty ,
anon from the castle walls
you ever dreamed of , dear !
and peter has the oysters , which he hates , in layers thick ,
for one fair vision ever fled
--you do n't mean you doubt everything?--i said .
that i may not no solemn day
and all manner of thorn trees bear figs naturally ,
the deeper , better part of us to love ,
is but the pang of unpermitted prayer .
have you forgotten it ,
was heard , and he came wondering to the bed .
oh , though the whole world praise it now ,
but ever a blight on their labours lay ,
she puts me in the shade .
they melt , and soon must vanish ;
a figure like hebe 's , or that which revolves
between the shoulder and the head
wind will beat your ship .
who curls in a dimple and slips along
cortez has been seeking a sponsor
now note by singing note , now chord by chord ,
for unto you at last she flies ,
the morn laid on her features
could yield his spirit that for which it panted ,
and , when he gets on random chace ,
without the baptism absolute of christ ,
_ in the third act , which is a year later , the chorus , who
_ toll slowly . _
he spake , and led the way , and they went with him . and the
free - voic'd as one who never was away .
“ refreshing , cherishing my strength and power !
there stood quadrille , with cat - like face
and dwivid famed for strength and speed ,
dragons are coiling down below
perchance , once more !
it chanc'd the stack he faddom't thrice ,
now let us to the year departed say farewell ;
and over it with fuller glory flows
ere he was heard to belch .
for where thou art or shalt be , there or here ;
to talk ; one thing is certain , that life flies ;
i tossed my head , and sung light strains of glee--
it seems the soul hath fled
goodness ; and , if i may use expressions yet more awful , of having
sometimes in shell the orient'st pearls we find:--
are not the old walls , not the walls where rahab
whom therefore thou devourest ; else themselves
for good , so far as good , when comprehended
for me the heavenly bridegroom waits ,
yes , and when twilight is falling softly
ghost - ship driven ,
' twould make an alderman feel gay
the rivers are swelling , the thunder is knelling
in her silver - tinselled raiment ,
clusters of dreamy junipers
tam tint his reason a ' thegither ,
chance and impatience blast their best designs .
that may expell this malyce from theyr mynde
eumaeus , " said he . " what is the news of the town ? have the
instinct of gore and glory earth has known
blossom in that heaven above us . "
above the compasse of the arched skie :
and knew my marriage - time was nigh ,
as you lean by the mere and listen :
or perche mai non puo dalla salute
the hero in the coming day !
i clothe my shoulders with a lion 's hide
are my sister and my brother .
no one cares now where i dined ,
speaking of a certain letter , abu'l - ala assures the man who wrote
when thou art dead , the author of our bane . "
the halesome parritch , chief of scotia 's food :
the boat hath left the lonesome rock ,
heated himself red - hot with fire ,
our freedom with _ one _ guard provided ,
he pointed to our sign
at length their unexpected guest
to other thus conferring said : " this one
wake , wake to clasp hope 's body dead !
the hillside sleeps dizzy with heat and light ;
hearing still the gusty laughter ,
faithful hearts that perished there .
with many tasks that were resign'd to thee ;
the lifted sword springs forth to face the foe ;
his venturous spear first drew the hero ’s gore ;
let libya boast no longer with her sand ;
down many a winding step to dungeons dank ,
that made mankind her worshippers ;
these lilies shall make summer on my dust .
to whom the tempter guilefully repli'd .
_ chorus . _ and their best vse of him they worship't , be
and gokula is void to - day ,
the elms , and the great white clouds ;
and when even dies , the million - tinted ,
that what is no sense must be nonsense .
the spear flew back the way it lately came ,
the walls of seville to my right i left ,
' who makes the bridal bed ,
with broad and burning face . "
his chamberânay , the straitest best of all .
leave thy loved cyprus ; too long denied us
ple flannels of the poor , " from him . )
heavy hangs the rain - drop
of a friend , after the complaints of ovid and the latin
not trickt and frounc't as she was wo nt ,
yet , trained in war and practised well ,
o then at last relent : is there no place
the raving polka spins ,
dysheryte shall he be . ’
for the sunlight shone no longer ,
and you wearied in desire .
with illustration simple , but profound ,
this icy region prompts our fear ;
could i , who put away all earthly love ,
wondering whether the price is high . "
by graces true as thine , there would be less
so tarchon spake ; his comrades , with a cheer ,
alas ! our young affections run to waste ,
at that age he would be too old for slaughter ,
and fault'ring knees that proof . weeping she ran
that what we feel of sorrow and despair
deter you not from opening thus much to me . "
his rapier was a hornet 's sting ,
saved .
should my jones more dorkings send ,
full many i 've pass'd in more piteous plight ;
blackwood & sons , edinburgh & london
while the flag with stars bedecked
sweet bird ! thy bower is ever green ,
no other key will answer my demand .
" hush , annie dear , do n't sorrow so . "
and i am in transports
the idol - temples and the shrines of lust :
we have come the primrose way .
and fired eyes like moonstones kissed
well - born , to whom grace concedes to see the thrones of the
their tempest - footed steeds .   podaleirius then
there are grim black stains , there are peoples in chains ,
a friendly greeting , or a spray
chief give orders to his own people , setting them severally in
of his guest or too rude to him . moderation is best in all
" a few short hours and he will rise
thus to ride the rolling billows . "
but not in wonted way ,
look to the coming time , and yearn
and gave the fates another form of death .
never during all my life - time ,
through the lush sponginess of deep - sea meadows
there came , minute , remote , the cry ,
why am i unsatisfied,--
_ my peace continually and shall not fear . _
the lands of dream among ,
is , for your momentary visit , yours ; and we
still well remembered , grieve not me ;
to lofty roofs and splendid halls !
laying new , precious pavements with a song ,
into his outstretched hands i cast .
in the meantime the fairies waked up by his words ,
the cloth - merchants , and let them be ,
richard the old , lead them in th'field he shall ,
but have through others ' merit been advanc'd ,
" the world turns softly
a minuet swam with the spruce mr . teal .
yet , scandal of the world ! from thee
my heart overflowed with sorrow and pity
the fiery energy of thunderbolt ,
lest i should learn to work alone ,
for thence,--a paradox
all latium swore the battle oath , and rage of men outbroke ;
his triple form originated in the fact that he and his two
to purchase by my native wit ! yet what the subway " best " has writ
cool in its linen her skin ,
the gestures of the craft are his
concerning these affairs thou ponderest
this truth shines out like bright new tin :
large , dark , and swimming in the stream ,
you 're at an evening party , with
the island queen becomes thy bride ,
and why so huge the granite?--
and you are sent back to me ;
which falls on all things with a quivering magic ,
how here , even here , he first unsheath'd the sword ,
let not the portal 's amplitude deceive thee . "
the fates have fitly bidden that he should be pillowed eternally .
“ our force surveying , mopsus saw him fly ,
to revel in joy ' mid the glad summer beam .
then andrew and all of them fled , but you followed him ,
like a maiden looking forth
give me the patches on my pants , the freckles on my face--
peril and toil :
and there , ' neath elm and willow trees
though the dew was on his hurrying feet ,
i have fiddled for your city
asked : ' why with us art thou so long engrossed ?
had not a voice thus warnd me , what thou seest ,
and for a surgeon call'd .
the eagle , whom he lures
branded in red - hot letters with your name .
an ' several acres of the floor was made a skatin ' ground ,
art symbolizes heaven , but love is god
now fades the last long streak of snow ,
like the earth
it chanc'd as thro ' the wood _ apollo _ stray'd ,
from the seven hills where rome , earth 's empress , stood ,
small fishes set the streams a - thrill
yea , blest is he , in life and death ,
across the boundless plain ,
as we look back .
cease to lament !   i can foresee
counts it honour to hate you , honour to fall by your spears . "
which he possesses , or shall yet possess ,
and then , sirs , then -- well i remember it !
the seaman piping aye to the rightabout ,
unheard - of stones that make the sick mind reel
come through the broken mind -- as the pease burst
jocund , as when this bosom first knew pain . "
while he thus anticipated
there were few in the railway waiting - room .
nor shall they fail , till , to its autumn brought ,
whose rising merits win each heart,--
what time the policemen at odd corners stared stupidly ,
unnumbered , as in summer heat the bees
and nameliche of thilke good
who could not get the place for which he sued .
that spirit sing :
and over that yit he hem wisseth ,
but soon ilk grief shall wear awa ' ,
that , filled with love , i may become
the bonnie lad that 's far awa .
before that i the leisure had
a host of prides , some better and some worse ;
then a beam of fun outbroke
stout porters who for places tarry ,
i subjoin the first stanza of " dido " as printed in the musica
it does not render me unfit
and urged my train the dreadful deed to dare .
spirits , o master ? "   i exclaim'd ; and he :
and quitting sense call imitating god ;
since you a servant 's ravished form bemoan ,
apple - trees , weighted with red fruit ,
of his mind 's music , by the listeners caught ,
whose proud race is nearly run
lempo guides the sharpened hatchet ,
wherewith a prince is honored . humbly ran ,
and that is well , " said lady clare .
ruth for my race , as all their statutes show ? '
phillis 's age                           _ matthew prior _
of maiden hair my bed is made ,
are friends delight or pain ?
gushing in torrents forth , forbade the rest
secure , for no alarming cranes molest ,
it was an abyssinian maid ,
dash'd together in blinding dew .
that i was not near from terror my angel to shield .
while through the inverted year the seasons pour ,
now wide awake , the vision of her sleep :
i would hate that death bandaged my eyes , and forebore ,
gleamed like drifting snow his tresses ,
she sought with tears a year ’s delay
that mourns the lovely rosabelle .
hour by hour , on bended knees ,
i 'll have a new name , too . ' well , sure enough
and the wind stirs her flowing locks ,
nor horses from the manger lead ;
to perish . blest and thrice blest were those danaans who fell
ye mermaids , arise from your coralline cells--
gin ever the dead come for the quick ,
is one of the cunningest fetches of satan , that he never
excellent militia to fight the indians and english .
oh , open the door to me , oh !
a thousand,—and a thousand more
a certain bardie 's rantin , drinkin ,
and your port immovable where you stand ,
climbs up to fill the world with light ;
and then descending met them at the gates ,
and light of all the kingdoms of the earth .
and turn to his head , as if he said ,
out of me the years roll ;
believe for certain , shouldst thou stand a full
each night -- hilarious heavens vast of night!--
were it in the poet 's power ,
and utter'd threats , which he hath now fulfill'd .
with shout and with prayer ;
' ah , brother , see ! i die ! look upon me ,
to thy mouth was i impell'd ;
and give lucinda to my arms !
for huntress - wise on shoulder she had hung the handy bow ,
and rávaṇ , though with deep wounds pained ,
against the danger desperately hurled ,
i had a splendid dream of thee last night :
like anuhláda(651 ) who beguiled
and the mistress played upon it ,
to that strumpet the stage ;
and stay;--on friday , flogging,--with an egg ! "
in truck for your toys
an ' rin her whittle to the hilt ,
quick starting tears , ' twas all she could , her eyes
had not the people , which of all the world
which i even by kindness may cruelly sever ,
but weighted with impulse , defying resistance ,
and its jaws should be extended ,
little pup ,
until forlorn , entrapped of gods she felt ,
xl . the ' son of maia ' is mercury .
towards his horse the good rinaldo steers ,
" let him talk , helen , and perhaps he 'll stay . "
this altered mien so sad and strange ? ”
will overwhelm us all .
she in eternal beauty may not bow
one all too sad for heaven , to whom eternity
his likeness as a cloud was gone ,
who else had hair
due sacrifice to this they set apart ,
tear up its roots with zealous care ,
and yet i firmly stand my ground ;
emperor .   in consequence of this supposed crime he was cruelly
and did not seem to move , they came so slowly .
fata vocant , conditque natantia lumina somnus .
to trial fled within .   clos'd were the gates
the gate , like death 's , reclosed upon the keep--
" o thou ancient wainamoinen ,
and lips so long attuned to sacred song ,
stiff as a turk , the beast of yarn remained ,
give me what is yours , and ceaselessly win your kingdom in me .
whilst the winds bear them o'er the mighty sea ,
it doth expand my privacies
virginia , occurred the name of " jeffries , david m. "
of blossoms which his hands have sought .
the naked wrestler struggling from the rock
the king was in the parlour , counting out his money ;
moist and chill the woodland smells
in sunshine were his only task ,
how one the other call'd . " o rubicant !
rode upon the heavy earth :
thus fenc't , and as they thought , thir shame in part
the great unwashed,--then thumbed and sped ,
for thee the woodbine shall forget its pride
but ne'er spak mair
so far was heard the mighty knell ,
when i perceived , like something that is falling ,
for black or hazel eyes
its shameful rites and orgies dread :
had been this day among the dead . ”
and built a house of snow .
to have that which mankind may not possess ,
for i must quickly wend another way . "
it will make our lazy kitty
sigh for the light departed ,
and sail about the world to scenes unheard
“ now all must perish ; all within the bounds
while stagnant lay a heavy haze ,
selected by _ r. l. paget _ .
yea , artist , thou , of whose art yon sea 's all news ,
out of their beings sweep , seek out , embrace ,
woodman , spare that tree ! [ see notes ]
for oft is sayde , and true it is certayne
" what goddess was your mother ,
and thou the moon , i would not bide so long
through the deluded mass pygmalion prest ,
" a few short days , perchance , or months , or years ,
both mongrel , puppy , whelp and hound ,
which nobody , etc .
till the long shadows point us back ,
from such a foe , before we meet ,
thou art messias ! ... and this paradise ! ...
her quaint madonna , dim with rain
on the still breast of peace they rest
and ’ twas at fall of evening grey ;
in the world tainted with the selfsame sin .
would be mighty hard to find .
or overscale my flesh ' neath joint and joint ,
slim in his khaki .
more skill than i , in all mine arts untrue ,
go straight forward to the business .
turned fleet as flame on arthur back
i can not let thee fade to death , forgetting .
where brocks eat wasp - grubs with their marrows ,
which has concealed from thee the living justice
and thy waved torch , more to kindle than light .
where aged saints in dreams of heaven expire :
i am not ignorant , myself , how dread
where no greek worships her shrined limbs
repulsed , they yield ; the trojans seize the slain .
' o hold your tongue of your weeping , ' says he ,
but all my being is ablaze with her ;
above their fellows in one glory met .
bare sands alone now overwhelm the coast ,
veil the wintry hour ,
yet wail , my spirits , wail !
leave the mad waves to beat upon the shore . "
kneel mid the rushy mire , and hold
on the word of a convert , i can not contrive ,
and sends thee one , a sample of her host ,
my fathers ' youngest sons were old ;
ought of the equal banquet . but when they had put from them
bearded wenceslaus , his son , whom luxury and idleness feed .
the sun shone bright again ,
for honor some , and some for scorn--
spirits of old tormented , who invoke
nor thought of man hath ever reach'd so far ,
with half a heart i wander here
_ prometheus . _                i am prepared
inscribed on a beautiful grotto near the water
in the melancholy marshes .
your kiss upon my mouth .
now please keep it dark . i 've been kissed by a man . "
quoth the bird , " yes -- i know him -- a bonze , by his phiz-
where nightingales their love - sick ditty sing :
what he has given ;
to heav'nly tidings from the afric muse .
when summer bespangles the landscape with flowers ,
i hear many words .
and what the furtherance of his earthly hope ?
there , in my country , it hath ever been
still wilt thou dream on future joy and woe?[dt ]
master werner , you may order
it was that all the time , my love ,
there must be ' eaps o ' plenty such ,
to win the crown whence i am dispossest ;
" nor man i see , nor see i work , which shows
and the moon lay white on the river and lit the sleepless ford ,
what scheme is thine ? what hope allures thine eyes ,
he remembered well the features
to thought so pure ! ye lovely fugitives !
hilarious i ran !
then glory 's chaplet shall adorn thy brow ,
scent the fresh foot - track of the idol - priest ;
in karyala i shall sell him
freemen stand , or freemen fall--
  barksdale , as before , thus renders the latter couplet :
a whiteness , like pure heav'n , presents ,
" oh sir ! you know i 'm betty foy ,
our gallant vessel rode ; around the mast
and , while no power to save him intervenes ,
for hector , who the thighs of fatted bulls
comes a youth with flaunting feathers ,
it glide flower - margined to eternity .
thou knowest all the future -- gleams of gladness
the race is not unto the swift ,
she answers with laughter and haughty disdain--
and your shoes are clean outworn ,
till after a time , he lay instead
and he constantly loved me , although i was poor ;
i drave beneath the breadth of heaven ...
this revelation to us , where he tells
if shoo is n't coortin ' , who is ?
and labor walks beside the mules ...
or find some woman 's hand to clench
delights to stay with me at home--
betwixt two worlds , the new one and the old ,
ut empta magno , sic parata ligno .
knowledge of it by developing another analogy of its constituent
but weary een like mine is no for seein ' ,
except bonturo , barterers : of ' no '
elegir la más hermosa .
so that neptunus nothing stal
the bat that lies in bed at noon ,
for jesu 's name i well may name
me did most ever'thing you see .
put strength into the words i speak ,
and at the head was lanky jim , and at the foot was joe ,
or seeks the porch -- a sunny place--
flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate glass ,
i can not make him dead !
place thy foot in no direction without being overcome
_ zerah . _                     no reply ,
still it be unfurled .
whatever you are -- be that ;
backward , like one who walks , as sound directs .
" onward , " i heard him say ,
the earth as a somnambulist moves on
wherefore , o hole in the wall here ,
when thus in public view the peace was tied
and as a fisher on the darkling sea ,
till he started , as though he were suddenly shot ,
thy grey - haired mother leering in her glass
of pain still linger , heed it not--'tis past :
variety of delicious airs _ , 1610 .
my time is short enough at best ,
_ the grasses curdle where the daisies blow ! _
and at this simple feast
thus she : and having paid the rite divine ,
on every side is danger .
alas , that you should be at once short of life and long of sorrow
that gather in your eyes ,
rose in his majesty , and nobler trod ;
that huge ferocious armament ,
i made the swift going down sign
thy pity by love 's chronicle ,
drifting ever ! drifting onward !
and at the sound of christmas bells
for whatsoe'er they tell us here
way . i will not that thou longer stop ; for thy stay hinders my
that 's why i come
at last the world we were born to own ?
which yet feels ( you feel ) the sun .
and left me mourning in a dreary jail .
with intricate shades of the vines that myriad - cloven
half up the hill , beneath a blazing sun ,
pale horror sate on each arcadian face .
o fancy ! ne'er will i forsake thee more ,
a poet came in a golden noon ,
far from futile , waste repining ,
and i 'll protect it now .
those ample clasps of solid metal made ;
of pines upon their wide roots poised ,
upon her breast she held a child ,
holy word .
indeed , such first editions oft before
in the dark troubled tablets which enroll
" tell me what has been thy folly ,
one night jim adams sez to me ,
but i exhort my mother , though herself
the purple stretches of the evening sky
they had no poet , and are dead .
and that a proper will i call .
i 'll seek no joy that is not link'd with thine ,
but the men at sea did that night agree
to nameless mysteries that keep
" ah , god ! " says charles , " so far are they re - moved !
not he who loses but who gains the prize .
at thoughts of leaving this my native shore ,
night thundered down the valley
and tell him the tale of malinche ,
the child was very beautiful in sooth ,
to his disciples , for rather believing
that all the world may of it hear ;
and i rejoiced upon his shore of pearls ,
as when some master - hand exulting sweeps
when one arose upon whose brow
how fit to meet thee , lovely flower ,
at the door of thy garden . thou smilingly saidst then " alexis !
from year to year the weeds had grown
the praise of persecution ; gaze again
as e'er on the couch of the wisest .
musical miracle !
of heaven , this man of clay , son of despite ,
no man there being wholly sane in mind .
though he stands amid the cheering ,
steals twilight and its shadows o'er the swale .
_ clishmaclavers _ , idle talk .
oh , haste , ere he leave us ! for who will ride then ,
how little hast thou gone !
pliny , the elder , quoted , 292 .
sholde scant be founde , whiche coude brynge vp his childe
' tis alive with the glory of growing things ,
the melodious character of the earth ,
and let 's try in the style of a different lay
and old men with croziers and stoles .
he mend that fault , again his lord will see ,
people too aged to be cured ,
i see that face of yours .
from no love of such things , but in humbleness meek ,
am the son of the respected
" these blessings still be thine , nor meddling fiend
on shadowed thresholds dark with fears ,
mentor , the companion of noble odysseus . he it was to whom
each will wear a " cross of honor "
sprawled for a furlong adown the road ;
cuts the monster into pieces ;
then , in the dark , our sense of light decays ;
i have not tasted yet .
they tear each other for the banquet 's remnant .
and far from care and strife
and all that was noble and worthy , again
till the red - gold harvest - rows
thus to kill suvantolainen .
and softened hope into surprise
the just alphonso , hippolite the good .
with ever - burning sulphur unconsum'd :
thick torpor clouds the climes ; eternal snow
the rose did caper on her cheek ,
from the rude stone of life vaguely , and tend
my sweet ! but bitter everything to - day meseems :
for when the soul and frame together are sunk
is it not provable
" what a dreadful bad pun ! " whispered samuel delhay ,
by him who ne’er from duty swerved .
the tall blue larkspur , white queen margaret ,
to free the soul from sordid tyranny ,
him - seemed bright raiment towards him drew--
for ( ter - remble ! ) i am aleck -- this is beth ! "
they say that he cuts quite a show .
am i a god as he ,
sleep the long sleep :
undrained the comrade glass ;
subject , but to - night something made him view things in quite a
when thy face is to the wall ,
for the wife
before the feet of the traveller .
the fresh field - air he loves , and rural green .
of the forlorn
and played badly at first , was resentful and cried
past willow - cum - leigh
and mossy network too is there ,
first blows are ours , high god be praised ! "
but if reluctant , who shall force thy stay ?
and all be done without our will ,
four o'clock .
april in england !   god , keep england free .
proportion'd , as a poplar or a pole ,
to make one leaf the next to kiss ,
threatens us present tortures ? "   he replied :
have you no traditions -- none ,
dale el dulce aliento
blown black as rain unkempt back from black brows ,
for lucrece thought he blush'd to see her shame :
thither hasten , swiftly flowing ;
an ' all the time he lets me talk .
i driven am to seeke some meanes to live :
viii    foreign lands
its limits round , forthwith i left the bank ;
and now for the blessing ! of little account ,
the sum an ' substance ov his creed;--
it got beyond all orders an ' it got beyond all ' ope ;
distinction to his misery . ' ]
along the words of merely human art ;
do thou , o ráma , with thy friend
has not yet acquired its strength ,
and she nurtured well the children
of all that heaven hath pure and bright !
cut off the length of highway on before ,
mi love is like the passion dock ,
maze of the lines ,
these are not to be reckon'd here ,
thebes , ii . ; iii .
and you thought to hear with an outward ear
on beulah 's hills she wanders now ,
an ' thy auld days may end in starvin ,
whose lips , for all the prayers they make ,
crushed in their mountain citadel ?
by permission of the author , and of the publishers
who had contrived a thousand feats ;
stand not to my mad passion all unmoved ;
love 's way
di magni , facite ut uere promittere possit ,
in every virtue , or of peace or war :
with hidden guile like smouldering flame .
i thought they would have rent the skyes .
but still this world , so fitted for the knave , & c.
that hangs poised on a lull in the blast ,
forthwith the babe was christen'd , and given him was a name
singing in her song she died ,
" but if still you object -- to be all on a level ,
yours in high halls of pomp and power ,
in cloud or sunny weather ,
nuntiat aut aliquas extimuisse minas .
they sent their misty vanguard creeping
and david drops , that secret botte hath pierced his overalls !
so isabella 's heart was form'd ,
unfathomed in thine eyes , glows rash and deep
tell thee secrets , quiet child .
and break on the lips while meeting .
érase un peje espada muy barbado .
th ' exulting mother , stained with filial blood ;
round the tomb to stray ;
jumpin ' to his feet ,
were in your herte set so fermely
prepared with these cheap properties , amusing tricks to play
around me , and a dying glory smiles
fail not so wholly , famish not when thus
.        .        .        .        .
death since then , were all too sweet .
turpiter hospitium lecto cumulasse iugali
i wail , i wail ! now hear my charge to - day ,
brought in a dainty daisy , which
only in part to my paraphrases . some of the fables in
must thrust the tears away .
check'd in his progress , the poor devil dies .
on the road to mandalay ...
but virtues opposite to make agree ,
por ti me estoy quejando
which announces to refined and intelligent customers
or the hound that followed slowly ,
to hunt the boar in the crisp woods till eve ;
coward ; and fondlewife , a jealous puritan ; and the catastrophe
can i pursue the joy of wisdom 's pleasant , peaceful path .
courteous , the swart - cheek'd two - sworded envoys ,
do thou record it in thine inmost soul :
oh , well , there was one honey - drop in the gall ;
to calm my troubled mind , before i ask'd ,
her henry 's holy shade ;
when , all at onct , sort o ' swallerin ' hard ,
the old king sits ;
that made me mad as i stood behind him ,
hence it is a form from _ yauh _ , _ yaqui _ .
in the glory of the sunset ,
one scorching harvest from those fields of flame
that one light draft was fixed there for the years .
arise to this fame ?
with what it glances through , and thus yon star
ghibelline cause in tuscany . he was a man of great qualities and
of how , that july afternoon ,
never bide the silver sunshine ,
therefore , fall in the dust and pray ! the seraphs adoring
nor suffered real pangs of thirst ,
and with their swords we ’ll hewe yan forrest downe .
through my window at night ,
the hazle 's stubborn stem intwined ,
glinting among the wraiths of wandering cloud ;
her self - sufficient grace and air ;
how confident , how purely chare ,
rippled on the beach below it ;
laeua manus sceptrum late regale mouebat ,
" what is your fortune , my pretty maid ? "
now off as fast as you are able !
and fearful night . " ]
level it off . when combining the flour with other dry
on the ribs of the ox a blow he gave :
overcomes and brings      his burdens to naught ,
his face turned toward its tail .
- i think of it to agony .
each one rings a merry
of massy substance , and stupendous frame ;
he was too honest and too smart for this vain world , i guess !
that there 's no giant now but steam ;
indissolubly strong : the fatal tie
vnwytté , unwise , foolish , simple , c. 511 .
this constitutional reserve of aid
and the eternal failure known !
" awake , o earth ! thine ancient slumber break ;
again on page my humble strains ,
non eadem nobis sunt tempora , non deus idem .
she stood before him pale and tall :
far safer through an abbey gallop ,
calling for kānu , kān , my life slipped by :
a wall
unto his notes ; and lo ! the grave old man ,
ledeȝ loȝen i{n } þat lome & loked þ{er}-oute ,
labour , as to debarr us when we need
of those old oaks , whose wet red leaves
the sullen wind was soon awake ,
his friendly aid to cheer the drooping heart ;
" where did you get that gold piece ? "
one only heart was pierced with grief unfeigned ,
from the giant 's mighty body ,
meeting -- life from life to sever !
drury revives ! her rounded pate
then keep along a - shooting till you ca n't shoot more ,
haply listens to the refined rhetorical petitions of
whence come those sudden changes ,
go :   cyril told us all . '
more of her fire for thee , or of her wind .
then his friends , to trim their garments , receiv'd striped furs
till they stood by the borders of the stream ;
i strive not ; shame it were to meet in fight
o fields where the blossoming clover swayed !
i would not change for thine .
to make my little jimmy linger .
so there will be no more bush ballads composed and
his woords fitlye placed , with his hevnly phisnomye pleasing ,
kind fate has so far hidden my secret shame--
with festive dances and a choral song .
he thinks he may find you , and really
mother , i can not mind my wheel
death will find us soon or later ,
he hears the parson pray and preach ,
she laid a beautiful egg of gold ;
slips from it , spent and stark .
before whose feet our little leaf we lay .
the grief that bends them low . love flows again ,
where the towery tresses divide ;
you 've stolen my wits away :
then seizing on his hinder scalp , i cried :
bacchatur , ac passim pruina
when hope a fear became ,
which fann'd the gardens of that rival rose
as if called up by love to grace
a change had come upon the show .
" ' to take her , and to leave the rest ! cruel ! cruel ! '
to me had spoken , and my will declar'd ,
of the brave and valiant english .
“ excuse it,--let the babe to death be given . ”--
and gasps and sighs
where touching this thine eye shall answer true ,
rome 's fiercest gladiator is to - day again
an ' marched round in front of a drum an ' a fife ,
some call it " gone before . "
we have marched to men 's laughter , and the mock of men .
if you see no flashing lightning ,
once again prepared for singing ,
unveil the bashful violet 's tremulous head ;
among the maim'd and miserable shades ?
we thank thee , gentle spenser , for thy song
her blood with ardent throat insatiate sips ,
something olympian still , or the coarse satyrs ,
handed down from by - gone ages ,
that men commit beneath it . art and song
in the apple of love 's eye . "
mild going to those trotting feet .
so that the mould is where was once the crust .
i wish i was by that dim lake .
whose feast of spoil , whose plundering holiday
i promise you , let occleve witness here
wanted -- authors of all - work to job for the season ,
here is a tramp who stands and gazes ;
press where it hath lain , laddie !
to watch a slowly setting moon .
with forged lies he makes his tale so good ,
in the broad heaven above , and better know
from one horn - tip to the other ,
sure to survive , when time shall whelm in dust
transporting thought ! here let me wipe away
say the bells of st . marg'ret 's .
i know not if he did so from triumph and from pride ;
diseases dire , of which a monstrous crew
hands and feet , scrambling somehow , and so dropped ,
that 's more than human , that is half divine ,
and he feels that him no vision cheated
at e'en , in the gloaming , nae younkers are roaming
with the sword , at the break of day .
some wretched being had crept to shelter ,
to grief i yield not , nor to blame submit ,
thus ten of the heathen twelve are slain ;
giving accompt of th'annuall increce
and they only scath
the cross was of bones ; the priest that read ,
or what a cup eld gives to man to drink ;
are not so skittish , else does darrell lie
yaf thanne and dede gret almesse
with sun - red light your feet were shod . . .
he reckd not , and these words thereafter spake .
' one drinks to jane , and darts a look on me ;
and listen to my mournful cry ,
the song fulfill'd its measure ; and to us
i could not choose a larger bliss
when seas , half - frozen , slushed the decks with slime ,
there wild woods grow , and rivers row ,
" what ship transported thee , o father , say ;
of the unpeopled world , following the track
for his daily bread he has to play ,
her pensive pose , her small claspt - hands , her hair
may sneer with contemptuous air ;
when macwilliam beheld the brave boy ride and run ,
graved and sawn amazingly
he excels in any of these sports ; he seems very powerfully
or foreign gill .
so scheweth it in his visage
what need of clamorous bells , or ribands gay ,
rose stoical , and we knew that she was dead .
of trembling parents , on the turrets stand .
not the six hundred .
and through the forest 's frozen branches
and she wad send the soger youth ,
and hoped the vain actors would soon run away;--
to trainor 's drug store , shot by jack mcguire .
and it was amusing enough , each infraction
is plainly seen , and ev'ry forest glade ;
" o master ! say which way can we proceed ? "
est homini , cum se cogitat esse pium ,
arches an alien sky .
we sail away with a pea - green sail
such a careless scorn as thine for passion
what shall thy longing avail in the grave ?
bot every labour axeth why
hast thou made a rueful bargain ,
to stere the people to pety that passe by
even as ' tis now the merry
a blissful swain -- i scorn'd the song
and anchor , hull , and cast - away ,
philosophers behold ; desponding view .
confusedly , and which thus must ever fight ,
nearer , ilmarinen 's dwelling ,
that my son should be unlike his father , but better .
his rosy eloquence , and thus inquired :
were ye by sunny dell up in the ben ,
the vilest deeds like poison weeds
a cab - horse jumped into the air and bumped against a lamp .
unspeakable , to thee ?
lately below , and join'd him ; and the pair
we haul along the horse in solemn state ;
afar off the fatal , disgorged scharpenelle ,
the cold , the faithless , and the dead . " ]
the emigrants ,
dr . wortle 's school 1 v.
in cottage small and larger farm ;
with others in the xanthus slain , he died .
to troy ’s proud monarch , and the friends of troy !
her pairty pursuis :
obicibus ruptis rursusque in se ipsa residant ,
spoken of religion :
and help him to unbend his too tense thought ,
to bear my inquisition . while they spoke ,
and in this heat discharge my reckoning . '
who has kept , after youth is past ,
most sure : and is it not for reason too ?
ecstatic on a sudden i was rapt ,
fell the evening 's dusk and coolness ,
in the bright , fireside , nursery clime ,
and show some several selves . a multiple
shall one displease and nat his loue deserue
in high dramatick wrath appears ,
to see the eager lad
“ tore the tight noose . then had she time to weep ,
i got many " pomes . "
and in his will is our tranquillity ;
have paid their insult back again .
for i am very small .
thee neither know i nor thy peers :
nay , thou hearest all her tones ,
place your hand in mine and listen ,
from old ikshváku ’s line he springs .
the roving eye , the bosom bare ,
the bear and the hippopotamus ,
ta'en by a galley from dunbar ,
so enough , the day is good !
assail'd the island of the sun :
and call jove 's vengeance on their guilty deed .
of loud laments , granada 's dame to see ,
thou know'st not yet atrides ' secret mind :
passions whose ends are honest , means are fair .
warm with the sun that kissed
list to the sound of the drumming !
on all sides . telamonian teucer , first ,
_ and the bee shall have his hour . ' _
london 's burning , windsor 's down ;
they sat and ate the rustic dishes there ,
thou friend and helper of the poor ,
would she have lost the poet 's fire for anguish of the burning ?
i own , my lord , i did them hook ,
of the fair bride , who with the lance and nails
as for wild flowers blue
hys sworde vpon the schireff he d
can you admire that science was so coy ,
sweet ! then come to me ,
my spirit arise to see again
sent suddenly and well .
forgiveness of all my vast evil .
i bade you go ; ah , wherefore are you gone ?
old mother occleve stretched her sewing flat .
on durdhar ’s car that near him drew .
his arm about my neck , kissing my hair )
of waves , i heard a dying groan ;
the reputation of his lifetime lost
the jugginses we seemed to be ;
and man 's prerogative to rule , but spare .
and quick the drop would twist up into form ,
of happy laughing children , far away .
  seven years shall not pass , the sun being at this time in the
rise then some other , and inform my sight ,
belly , and breast , and naked flesh expose ;
slopes shall ascend where once a green - house stood ,
in the atmosphere itself ; and when therefrom
far less would listen to his prayer ,
as though we had but just begun
and vivien answered frowning yet in wrath :
thou couldst not , then , a helpless damsel slay ,
of those who came to hear the plain - taught word ,
a wedding train went by ;
bordes were layde , and clothes were spredde ,
so leanly sails the day behind the day
knits votes that serve , with hearts abhorring , peel ,
thou forebodest the dread avalanches ,
in doing as the goddess told him . he went moodily home , and
and ravin around .
olde woes , but joyes , to tell
“ than the traytoure treunted the tyesday thar aftyre ,
as some old chief 's of grand inhuman rome :
ere yet the wanderer of the midland sea
thy body , now beleaguered ; whether soon
i tore the veils from mysteries aside ;
than the best of the pleasures we had :
it quivers in the bliss
observ'd th'appointed way , as her behooved ,
from that palace lofty terrace -- her the mother of the king
on scotia 's mountains fed his little flock ;
close by the marge of leman 's lake ,
the wedded heaven wends married to the moon ;
have a button of good - nature on the point of it .
temples no lesse ingenious then joves .
you have had your turn and spoken your home - truths :
and waiters handed lemonade
mr . white in black 's buildings green - grocery sells ,
flee , oh ! flee the tempter 's snare !
gainst him goes roussy , in then louell ran ,
little the wicked skipper knew
o second mother !
to whom the lond was entendant ,
the wind and i , we both were there ,
where nobody gets old and bitter of tongue .
the wildcat and the panther , the redman 's sneaking ways ;
" back to the cell and poor employ :
and saw -- as one sees a far - off shore --
in shining masses o'er him . wild refrains
the wise new prudence from the wise acquire ,
and sounding tempests in dark prisons binds .
the conquering monarch , stopping to take breath
a genuine summer in each others breast ;
praying for peace ; and hosts they slay , chosen as custom would ,
can break or dissipate that pallid spell ;
saith horace ; the great little poet 's wrong ;
where i may speak to you alone , my craft
that nature hung in heaven , and filled their lamps
to the all - devouring whirlpool ,
' she said she 'd like to see us if we walked
' they nought pursue but honour , fame , and glory .
proudly upward to the skies .
ah , peggie , since thou ' rt gane away , vol . ii . , 72 .
lorsqu'aux longs jours d'été cachée en un buisson ,
aniou , and mayne , with gascoyne which he takes
to a land where the fanciful fountains are raining
fierce with the murther - lust , scowl ravening ,
his soldiers hurled the disk , or bent the bow .
steal round our hearts in thine embracing arms ,
a most offensive song ! thank god , each morning , therefore ,
sits like enchantment , making glorious
will lead you to the brink of ruin . "
death is busy with her grave .
from life we issued reconciled to god ,
for this i mai wel telle soth ,
grows to the rending claw , and the lewd leer
and close - set skull - caps ; and those wilder hordes
and love and labor , who have gone ,
saw ye not the sun drop slow
that when he gets his supper he may do so with a light heart . as
onward we moved , and reach'd the ride
tho ' i say " fie ! " to them ;
cast largesse , and be merry ! " so they speak
with thine arrows tipped with lightning ,
takes god to witness he affects your cause ,
tuo hundred thousend for his sake ,
medea , animo aegra , amore saevo saucia .
for what have i to lose or fear?--
such depth of eye and such a princely frown !
of music to the moon -- farewell -- farewell .
man must never have _ too _ much ;
and thine , long lingering on the strand ,
guilty or guiltless , all within its range
wherewith , in time gone by ,
more foes by this same scroll : when i began it , i
the eyes glaze once , and that is death .
while , organ - stops of god 's own choir ,
read something in his eyes , saw in his eyes
wi ' fright that day !
some prospects built on probability .
ah ! not like cloe sigh !
has , so the proverb tells us , got
sleep , little child , his and mine !
on his last low and silent bed ;
half thought the hero 's soul was grown
with him to the pump ,
knew his name .
with paste of almonds , syb her hands doth scour , 393 .
one bound he made , as gay as when he started .
yet return them all this answer ;
whose highest harmony includes the lowest under the sun . "
thyself shalt sacrifice      thy son with thy hands .
there surely i shall speak for mine own self ,
he knowing well the miserable hags
blent with stringed instruments or tambourines ,
now , when i think of goethe , i seem to see his soul , all the
which past with you and me.--
with its own deep melodies ;
thund'ring he fell : the victor vaunting cried :
and ponder my childhood again ;
the forest bends , the sea - spray flies ,
we watch the swans and never a word is said .
with power immense , with justice arm’d in vain ;
" and i can die ten thousand deaths !
soft drapery about it , fold on fold ,
the appointed fine let ilion justly pay ,
whether lives or is not living -- royal nala , no one knows . "
and hath the awfuller sway :
of glory to the lovely stream .
stays she still within the room ;
to join the music of the angel choir !
the forms of prayer
throughout all this land of blisses ,
opportunius incidens viator :
my white hair ,
yet from thy glory in the skies
you spotted snakes with double tongue ,
" ... the play is genuinely dramatic , and its impressiveness is
that 's steeped in any hue should take its dye
and make time 's spoils despised every where .
no bad man 's happy : he is great , or rich.--warburton .
a shadow which yet was too sweet for a frown .
ourselves must we give way to next month 's set--
yet , but the husband 's kindred may ascend
and many a hill did lucy climb :
now , le ' me see , thet is n't all ; i used , ' fore leavin ' jaalam ,
the cannons roar from shore to shore .
for now there breaks across the faint grey range
poor exile ! from thy happy birth - land driven .
the current of my former life was stemm'd ,
vain hope ! what numbers shall the field o’erspread ,
with zeal alike , as ' twas begun ;
and starts her thus:----rage , rapine , force !
for happe & hele þat fro hy{m } ȝede ,
raised his paw up to his forehead ,
as a dream of snow in love and light ,
well do we know thy pow'r invincible ,
i 've lived to feel how pride may part
whose forms we ca n't discover
and sometimes overwhelming sense of pain .
" oh buy but two candles , good women , but two ! "
and brown the crisping leaves , “ oh , love , ” he said ,
of each that for possession sues
green - glittering in the sun ;
i was a child when first i heard the sound
and frailer grows the soul that once was strong,--
wilt thou own me ? wilt thou claim my kindred ?
or hear the goat - foot piping low : ...
so i peppered the brutes for fair .
baked the lower - half of oat - meal ,
and on my trunk 's surviving frame
he gave up cards and swore no more .
his hauberk strong he wonts to combat in ,
hence , vain deluding joys
little bo - peep has lost her sheep ,
_ as many in our senate did aver_.--[ms . erased . ]
calling it a graceless part
how many will rise in the spring , i wonder ,
of a thousand dreams .
which says that though young love is strong ,
hark to the unstruck bells and drums !   take your delight in love !
smell sweet , and blossom in their dust .
no man was worth regarding , o.
betrayed no ambiguity .
freeze the willows near the water ,
art scarcely blossomed from the bud ,
i was ambitious -- have you known
and be his mate hereafter in the heavens
from the wicked constrain me to flee ,
nor medlar , fruit delicious in decay ;
and eager with tempestuous delight ; -
away went gilpin , and away
so that i mai the vice eschuie .
your flowers of love , o flower of lovers !
our bread was such as captive 's tears
alike to no such aureate earth are turn'd
europe 's plains , or crush the bear .
i meet folks alway
had crida listening strode : when ceased the thane ,
under the dazed and distant sky ....
on the second night , however ,
made me the thrall o ' care .
so these,--and , heard of once again , are chased
and gain his hat again at half - past eight ?
complete , and he sold them for money down
about past times , and are delighted by narratives which
" if in this fire , or monster 's gaping jaws
from out yon tuft of blackening firs .
where is the justice that condemns him ?   where
and difficult crags they floated , and the arch ,
then i began : " sorrow and not disdain
better to break your heart and die ,
but let it pass ; anger is not a flame
and , as the dusk turned everything to dreams ,
and here 's the " maiden of cashmere , "
a plaintive , puzzled cadence comes ,
a que sus redes y asechanzas pruebe ,
as sion in her height of pride ,
prince , where your radiant cities smile ,
fancy , and the poet 's shell .
that wild storm .   thousands perished ; corpses thronged
and sank her in the sea .
some prayed who never prayed before ,
marvellous is the battle now and grand ,
the great , long , red - legged scissor - man .
on the shores of gitche gumee ,
knocked my head against the portals
they fell thick one on another . '
were gowned in your glorious hair .
with ebon - tipped flutes : close after these ,
if god would it them send .
helpless , hopeless , bleeding , dying ,
expresses against those from whom he had experienced malice or
nor grudge a yonger brother
teem'd her refreshing dew ?
still take advice ; though counsels , when they fly , ii . 146 .
coming and avoided it ; he watched it and crouched down so that it
if mourning friends should her convey
an ' tramples on the daisies at ' is feet .
with random slaughter drives the adventurous train ;
that he should have so certain aim ,
turneth his dying eyes , my soul takes flight .
maketh all ye yonge bacheloures full sicken ;
from sky to sky on either hand ,
treachery , rapine ,
that saved or damned regardless of desert ,
tolma de kai amphilaphês dynamis
we live in an evil day . "
mournful winds and waves are sighing ,
` owl against robin ' .
and so men seyn in al the toun of troye .
those royal arms , that lookt so nice ,
beset with snares , and full of envious strife .
my pride , my caprice , and the preference shown--
in some vast utterance , of which you and i ,
his faithful comrades laid sarpedon down ,
the proud valiant men ,      plain to be seen
by speaking ; so i delayed .
" ' mongst the rebels they fine 'em who will not turn out ,
shall live with christ on high .
if men should pass above
oh , the love beyond computing
like thine are laid in earth ,
just as i would have shaped and colored them ;
we read within the sacred page
k---- brings matters on ;
when spake the king , alighting : " come , o wife ,
is there aught worth losing or keeping ?
so cried the stars to the fishermen three ,
and pushing at their chests his pointed lance ,
eight - stress anapestic
he fasted and fought , and glory won .
attracted by certain poems in various papers over the state and
( here ! come here ! and gather primrose
to gentill robyn hode ,
he left his boy five hundred pound ,
i lift my eyes upon the radiant moon ,
be worthily perform'd .   from peter these
ben had a purse well - stored with gold !
felt all the waves awaking from their sleep .
stone vessel , and his little naked feet
sure eu'en from you
that murder for the state is murder still ,
but as froggy was crossing over a brook ,
side , and never once goes to bed in his life .
we have trod the wine - vat 's treasure ,
bend the lindens of the valley ,
when highest rapt and favoured most ,
unprofitable sounds , weak arbitrators !
that night he learned how silence best can speak
and when a while he there had stayed ,
whom death can not sever ?
" take the world ! " zeus exclaimed from his throne in the skies
in many straits of sea and reaches wan
he ended ; all the admiring sons of greece
to guard the banner of the free ,
and was ware thereof as he sat by him and heard him
it is oftentimes a question
all thy thousand ears thou keepest
called you by some fair grecian name ,
thou wast on th ' other side , so long as i
the one seem'd woman to the waste , and fair ,
for the howl along the tow - path and a fate that 's still in doubt ,
( made by such error temperate and wise ) ,
" oh ! woe is me unhappy , " burst dame kriemhild out ,
shall flutter the breath of your wooing :
and , stretching out to heav'n his pious hands ,
wearied descends , and swiftly down the sky
where is he now ? in what land must he die ,
making his first analysis of light
though hundreds of years ago it was--
“ what meditate i ? o , ye gods ! i pray ,
thy pastime from thy birth ,
the just fate gives ;
south o'er the ocean :
hog - shouther , jundie , stretch , an ' strive ;
the emancipated world enjoys itself
and it 's handy for striking a light .
as sap foretastes the spring ;
ulappala 's blind - eyed damsel ,
peaceful flowing colebrook river--
o hear my fervent pray'r !
the path that leads to the grove of the furies ?
there is a talk behind the curtain of me and thee
but glowed so bright , they filled with fear .
well can they judge of nappy ale ,
ilerda , darted in marseilles his sting ,
for some are red as roses , and some are gold as daffodils ,
me fate hath slain , and phoebus ; and , of men ,
and wily self , tricked out like tenderness ,
my friends ! how often , in our social talk ,
three serious accidents that year befel
from the full godhead , flicker with the unrest
de tu ulcerado cuerpo , y si lo mandas ,
of things in store ,
circling about and murmuring , their affection ,
for the right and the good lead us ever to strife ,
i can not see the smiling earth ,
magic heroes of wainola ,
look how so many valours , long undull'd ,
to taurus the meridian circle left ,
as pleasant songs , at morning sung ,
where level branches of the plane
" alas , jerusalem ! alas ! where 's now
all light and love before me .
at mercy 's call to stretch his arm and save
' a french writer ( whom i love well ) speaks of three kinds of
matching our broken - hearted wit against her wit ,
thy rage in safety through the files of war :
this method of describing the grecian chieftains is obvious , and
and others round his body , rudely sewn
that works in sunless ways ,
these phrases of refinement i must borrow
went jumping at the woman 's heels .
i loved my children more and more .
can beat his shadder , mighty near !
an ' our stunted children die .
it is plain now what you are . your head has dropped
not yet the haunt of grazing herds ,
" what kind of animal is bullen sahib 's dog ? look at him ! "
till the fair vision blinds him . and the sum
earth wakes , and one orchestral symphony
cold , serene ,
or rest like silent sages ?
in all their gushing joy
rises a hill , and mounts not very high ,
and from the stately elms i hear
the silvery sea - weed matted round her bed ,
the blood and spirit of one but mortal boy .
on its lingering roses ,
many a tar we hope to find ,
to censure all with scornful eyes ,
loosed her slender dress ,
nor doubt the vision of the powers divine ;
on the lips that are free now to cry " shame , shame ! "
and lesse to lean on : because than                      _ then _
and ai n't this a blimed bangkolidye ?
a ruler of the waters and their powers :
unto the soul which can not live
these less things hold my gaze !
the chat on various subjects ran ,
john a. flack , the warlike captain
the dinting thud of birds whose course is done--
till the world seems a world of husks and bones
and spire and dome in diamond blaze ;
gnawed in my brain , and there i lay
" we have quite ceased from guessing or surmising ,
to our dear dark foster - mothers ,
i love the fond ,
wish'd i should one day marry her ;
he seems quite bright , and sees and hears--
he soon sat himself down to concoct the fish sauce ,
from tender dawn to sunset . when she speaks
rassmann 's wondrous trumpet - blowing .
for so many hard rix - dollars .
i never thought the call of fife and drum
phantastic coals lurk in the dust ,
and some was sliced and some was halved ,
' till half a leg was scrimply seen :
that he may save and succour those
and translate--"they ( the lycians ) had attacked all the
" yet had we never granted , " / spake alberich , " this to do ,
brutes graze the mountain - top with faces prone ,
upon whose shore , to whose cool breathing
that run along the summit of these trees
was to their gratulation , silent , each ,
where the streets end
like rushing torrents from the bursting skies !
for my nephew 's sake , whom i fain would find .
that i sore griev'd to see his wretched case .
for by the hands of dubric , the high saint ,
whereas may was in her pride :
then all their mightiest men gave ear to him
to separate existence,--and each bearing
and from those scrolls alack he show’d
another may not give thee recompense ;
hairs less in sight , or any hairs but these !
lo ! the maid her rosy cheeks is laving .
it is not right that pagans should thee seize ,
the last thin links of flesh .
began , when , lo ! a panther , nimble , light ,
henceforth take warning by the fall
in times of golden date , ' tis true ,
maternal , and she has a sister 's tones
when it was made the nest of so much ill . "
yes , erin , thine alone the fame,--
and took them quite away .
“ the angry god 's forbidding flames , thy power
here , to this one narrow room ,
you wish me buried in eternal night ,
buy terms divine in selling hours of dross ;
tracking the fugitive ; he captive made
and all in a stew
hasten to the refuge of thy sister , and protect the son of isaiah
whom nature charms , and whom the muse inspires :
to you , the richest folk this side of death ,
in a worse season ; as it was ,
her damask late , now changed to purest white .
and the steed flies onward swiftly ,
dedit sequendam calle recto lineam .
as now to any eye was plain ;
' for this effect defective comes by cause,'-
and love that lives a day .
_ a high comb carved of tortoise ; _
burn and shine ,
the righteous rise and leave , their counsels done ,
" frost , thou evil son of northland ,
-- faint odor from the day - flower 's crushing born ,
o , how your summer aspect gay
such as silly shepherds use
i heard a moaning in the room below , and then
that were his foes , have little cause for mirth .
of crushing hoofs and tearing feet
as a star bursts through the cloud ,
o thou with dewy locks , who lookest down
always did ye espouse the cause of the victor .
ye banks and braes o ' bonnie doon
( the hardest bondage to a generous mind ! )
church on the coast of suffolk
bring back the lost lovely summer to me !
with bow , wow , wow , for how d'ye do ,
even , as the proverb says , that in a board
it 's funny the thoughts wot come ;
before the bishop -- how they bear
cardenio , though he loved the maid ,
" o swelling sea ,
her plains and her valleys are deluged with tears ,
mee disobeyes , breaks union , and that day
flying to a river before the blast of a grass fire -- the flame
that stared at me before .
and drink the delights of july 's sweet morning .
than , panting to soar upwards , off he flew ,
trust in a god still lives ,
grudge not the cost .   ye little know the cares ,
and in our boat we stepped and took the stream .
they stood and gazed , or sat in shady place ,
he sighed ; i turned , and on his cheek beheld
i had a fellow as my guest ,
he had betrayed me to his grave ,
and fat .   and once again the cottage - home
lo ! the gladiatorial band ,
some were mowing , some were raking ,
as battle now the aweless sons of troy
maceualli , vi , 4 . subjects , servants .
o quam mendose uotum insaturabile habendi
lean down , o god , lean down !
and not a thousand others / had he then ta'en for her alone .
the queen amidst calls on her host with timbrel fashioned due
a friendship , sir , i 'll not conceal .
to want the strength of bulls , the fur of bears .
each snatch a hasty kiss , and then away .
same year his head fell under the sword of the executioner .
and who is he , that fondly presses
apollo these struck from his silver bow ,
let these three ancients be preferred to all the moderns as first
how suddenly we halted in our climb ,
must heed the word of him who came to serve ,
it 's a song we sing on the prairies wide--
to lift it as high as his head .
by park or sedgy pool or bearded moat ;
whose hand , whose essence , what divinity
seemed infinite purities half asleep
and bid the roaring bellows cease to blow . "
' tis folly to decline ,
and then we swung our nose against their bows
how gorgeous all ! oh , never may the spell
against the unsuspecting brotherhood .
and fetch her thence ! ah , ha , the bar works loose .
a light , transfiguring with her sacrament
and not come nigh thee .
whate'er thou'lt feign as yet more closely joined :
dost speak with wily vivien ?
and numbs the little prayer - bird 's beating wings .
humble servant ,
is fine for perambulators ,
ye , whose high worths surpassing paragon
and frown'd on from the arctic 's haggard sky .
thrice welcome , darling of the spring !
twisty - twiny ,
a homesick wanderer knows . "
and scarce secure , as such digressions are fair ,
and i myself am but a lazy lout ,
and rings that glow and glitter in the light ,
florence exult ! for thou so mightily
sheen of wings and shimmer of angel faces
en paz con dios y en paz con los humanos ,
every bar of time and place
then came a sight that made the bravest quail :
as to an actor 's ; and the curtain down ,
of all o'er which such love may be a ranger :
hatred has entered you to make distrust
' i 'll never shake your hand , ' he said .
that , though it can not be denied to contain many striking
and pupil of marsyas . pausanias describes a picture , painted by
yet ere he lands he ' as ordered me before ,
its guise with glory .   oh , bird that i have killed ,
proclaims love 's ghost -- what wonder skies should fall ,
now , if to ancient sins he should unite
an unarmed crowd , old men and matrons , all
if thou wouldst only work as well as want ?
the grim birds , gorged with dreadful delicacies ,
the muscles set , and the great heart
a duplicated golden glow .
their little bodies as a bed ;
at once a bud and yet a rose full - blown .
and a shade , through the toss'd ranks of mirth and crying
her sandals . crocalé , ismenian nymph ,
from behind each fence and farm - yard wall ,
shall watch and ward be round him set ,
i can leave you in my place
i , even i , my bow in hand ,
the fiend one plack was left for to defend him .
she bathed ; and , robed in white , with all her train ,
those who held the strong city of mycenae , rich corinth and
such gestenyng he a - right ,
then the light of day commencing
who on the bridge among the crags dost sit
the mountain ponies prick their ears ,
that makes her lov'd at home , rever'd abroad :
i hitherto absolve thee .   in return ,
some make their home ,
lighting the little tent , and with a mysterious splendor
she said , " i will go to solomon . "
shake fists at opals in a dome .
and to the sibyl 's dwelling - place the gift in hand he bore .
the more i 've viewed this world the more i 've found ,
slanders , or injuries of strangers or the world , and that he bore
to each other 's heart , and dearer ,
then will the earth,--that oft - times to the eye
of willie jones : i think she should n't oughter !
was far too glad and loud . "
he had been kneeling by the bed , and now ,
high joy was his because his deed
avail no more .
whom maire de frantschmen call ;
to heaven , lost in the blending
no more that severing scene
it is an old , old story , and the lay
sigh no more , ladies
until they came to the merry greenwood ,
white her bosom , like two snowy dovelets ;
burned in my heart makes my boldness stream forth ;
lo , from the shades of death 's deep night ,
rapt in the storm are whirled .   the tuscan deep
but oft , when underneath the greenwood shade
like water in the desert -- heaven in death !
otia sacra , by mildmay , earl of westmoreland , 1648 , p. 37 .
although it comes in vain
they told me , heraclitus , they told me you were dead ,
perhaps i was not amorous enough
where thou dost stand -- an hour ago ,
and still the progress of his beams they check ;
too slow their fleetest flew for me--
and wist not where she was , for it was derk ;
gathers her brood under her wings at night .
so your hair on your brow
_ jason . _     dost thou reproach me with a guilty love ?
this is the morn should bring unto this grove
rang trump , and conch , and piercing fife ,
i 'm a plain - spoken zommerzet man--
we descend
should pine for love , in love 's embrace ,
the trembling fingers yet the fauchion strain ,
as centring to one point they bear ,
on her sad breast , his shining head
night or day ,
of roman , grecian ; draws the patch'd gown close ,
what secret trouble stirs , 93 .
yet , unforgetting ,
ta'en in such cruel sort , as grieves me still :
so,[v]if i ne'er may[v]of a surety have[v]him ,
then to the radiant thrones they move in state :
as for will and testament i leave none ,
that these first words i write seem cold and strange .
( which his blanket he 's kicked on his trunk , miss ,
stood hearkning by , and cry'd it was the p----ce .
for mighty spirits are abroad
the kindred of cowal would meet at the prime ,
and hold me firm in your esteem . "
do foes clasp hands in brotherhood again ?
till just before she died ;
by the ford across the river ;
hand locked in hand , heart kissing heart ,
and the song - sparrow trills ,
o'er the small sea - water thread
grew above its fields of lava .
as was et up by the cannibuls that lives in ceylon 's isle ,
and bear up mandar ’s threatening weight . ”
i come from temples where her altars are ,
a volume of the law , in which it said ,
lashed at the wizard as he spake the word ,
between each grass - blade and the next ?
sneak away to yonder mountain ,
our life is short , and our days run
of stateliest view .   yet higher than their tops
in which i sing of love .   alack ,
nor stop to inquire , while the dinner is staying ,
and with loud clamours , which heaven 's concave fill ,
perchance on earth of those diviner sires ,
who blinked the blinding dazzle - rays that run
_ tocher _ , marriage portion ; _ tocher bands _ , marriage bonds .
o fleet - foot stranger ,
when you 're next to blaspheming , it 's best to be mum .
which gave to others all the heart desired ;
" where be ye gaun , ye marshal - men ? "
where a widow of high degree ,
before we met and you what i had passed .
that it all sordid basenesse doth expell ,
o'erpowering vision in me !   but so fair ,
of those high things which make life worth life 's while !
punishing deeds , high raised his heavy hand ,
and therefore lucrece swears he did her wrong ,
pale isabella kiss'd it , and low moan'd .
whilk aye has been drawn when my king had a fae ;
a warm and deer - skinn'd cell for rest
my master carries me to church ,
in vain the master 's forming care ,
no charm of color , nor of change , nor glow
has blackened it already .
there in that awful moment , it was this :
with foolish hopes of unattained delight .
that other , which hire wordes herde ,
  the change is from the red light of mars to the white light
sits desolate in dust beside
sore mourn'd for them their kinsmen in wild but bootless woe .
it was a childish ignorance ,
" we are earth 's best , that learnt her lesson here .
and shut themselves , when touched by morning bright
in the great doors of night .
and all i fail of win .
flew laughing away ;
renewed their art and minstrelsy .
in shadowy years , too distant to remember ,
like many an offspring of our saxon clime ,
at all , any more , till he drops her--
while time , caught fast in pleasure 's chain ,
" let us pass on , my henry , " she whispered softly , " we must hold
and she turned to him and asked him
i am no flatterer -- you ' ve supp'd full of flattery :
who will carry my love the message
the great emathian conqueror bid spare
knows , too , their defects , which he does not shrink from
she can forget the doomed and prisoned men
here _ caledonian _ chiefs for health resort ,
and to his fader thus he spak :
in the winter evening .
the next day 's entertainment of odysseus , where he sees
but , whenever ' mongst his people
" to love , sweet mistress , ' tis a duty . "
i thus : " as wax by seal , that changeth not
concealed by its accidental vesture , but that the spirit of its
his torments almost drove him mad;--
that clings to the bleakest side of the mountain ,
was left a little longer upon earth .
and , brandished , gleams aloft
dreams about me , though i know
and so make a city here .
all he lost , and by his fist--
dumeta natalemque silvam ,
taken twelve cities , and eleven round about troy have i stormed
a background to the dreams of that brief sleep
grendel in days long gone they named him ,
they have not waited half so long as i. _ "
bold olivier , whose better arm was freed ,
as he breasteth the steep thundercloud,--
for thee at night i wake and weep ,
the vision dies at its birth .
but when tis the end of _ comedy _ , as _ jerom _ in his epistle to
the misty solitudes ,
rejoice with me ! the chastening rod
' men work together , ' i told him from the heart ,
bud empty toys .
down whose stream , as down a river ,
tho ' types of it have been too rare .
what flames , what darts , what anguish i endured !
when , toward the enchanted bower , the prince
near the tunxis , south of riverton ,
what deed soe’er his loving son
to the fair world : and heedless of repose
to urge them up . ' tis thus that blood , discharged
even those thou would'st in veneration hold ,
at last she sat up with a start ,
reading , conversing .
thereon the son of peleus , when he had listened to all the thanks
and women 's praises so resplendent show ,
none shall be left unslaughtered ; none
and for that riches where is my deserving ?
salty teched a humpback an ' win out ten !
seems fantastic to the rest :
on thy white breast ? and who with amorous eye
time plays with :
my roof - tree is the shadow of her hair ,
but his heart was heavy and like to burst .
like april morning clouds , that pass ,
the cause , the cause , most cruel to enslave ,
my tired breast girt with suffering , and my brows
they left three children ( beside george , who drank ) ;
i'se fear'd dey'd break in two . "
o , fairly spread thy early sail ,
_ the world ’s wheels _
what auayle is it the worlde to obtayne
but he must go by fort bukloh to his own place to fare ,
and took his pick .   ' he 's in the town , ' he said .
and so conclude that it is just that those ,
man enters life for trouble ; all he has ,
ask that his bright winged cherubim
þe{n } is bett{er } to abyde þe bur vmbe - stou{n}des ,
who led on moonless nights ,
so may the gods , who view this friendly strife ,
all returns to its place .   use and habit are powers
sé más feliz que yo .
if vain for others , not in vain for me,--
but he does not win who plays with sin
but suppose as we taxes the goods they sell ,
a pledge the sceptred power of sidon gave ,
and bolder than a king 's command--
when to go out , my nurse doth wrap
then thus the gentle matron in return .
oh thou that an eleventh to the ten
to say i am or am not such as she ?
flew to north - west and to southward ,
' a pretty way they treat their brave defenders ! '
sordid his tunic was , with many a patch
to tarnish that clear vision i gained by fire ,
galene , iii .
even the wise and beautiful ,
another house had been held apart ,
for sae waik , an ' sae silly an ' helpless was i
touchende a gentil maide , as thus ,
over the damp grass , ankle deep ,
sweet wine in little cups they sipped ,
from far the sages saw , from far they came
who servilely their lives employ
still in her silken vesture clad
in himalaya the accent is on the _ second _ syllable .
' twas lang ago , lang , lang ago ,
and for man likewise is his fate decided ,
and breathed in them mine agonies .
to this dying .
the road is dear , more dear
from the gray - beard of my father .
following him wise , when thou saidst , ' the ages are renewed ;
when beetles droned across the lea ,
fair robes , who straightway marvelled on the dream , and
and telephones of cans and thread .
with me the kind enchantress long has dwelt ;
the joy is ours , but all its own the sadness .
as the peacefulest psalm ;
inestimable , by her beauty charm'd
here brave magricio and his peers are crown'd
just because for ages man
mary and michael we d , but fates are crossed ,
glorious
alone most fair to all men ’s eyes ?
on his evening horizon , the light was from thee .
better than that , if thou approve our cheer ;
her words set off by some superior power ;
_ allegro furioso . _
where thou before hast gone ;
the free - born nostrils of the king ,
' on his charger , white and fiery ,
till at sunset hiawatha ,
and many a corpse of men in battle slain ;
dropped its last oak - leaves at the rally .
what disaster
dicere , et insidias arrius hinsidias , etc .
perhaps the ideal run of the present time would be described as
in my presence anon that ye hym kysse
fate winged its flight to the bold charioteer
does his song cease?--avenge it by the deed ,
ask uncle sam with pleasant smiles
thine own dear bookes are guilty . '   ( vol . i. p. 150 . )
and suffer , rather than my people fall .
i hark the calling squalls —
the friendliness of my own land and people .
with the notes of the swan , ' tis from thee it comes now ,
the friend of man , the friend of truth ;
have their flight , and fall in common
and through dark night one to lie beside .
of science , honoured by the name of boyle ,
" for the vain toys that pomp and power bequeath ?
nestling by his arm and side ,
and the carriage , her smile seemed to fill it
that speak through quivering lips from heart to heart ;
pictured trophies to their grave ,
fortune had lavish'd all her store ,
which ' tis my duty ever to fulfil ?
that i who was most erudite of lawyers ,
now never a heart to my heart comes homing ! --
her delicious body there,--
then in an arioso key ,
thy body findeth ample room
but you 'll always find that nine from eight
most like the faithful pair are they ,
and their glad animal movements all gone by , )
meat and drink . then they strewed for odysseus a rug and a
the weeping ash in the dooryard
some naiad ? say ; or is a grace his flame ?
and each of us take his aventure . "
take then no vow at random : ta'en , with faith
earth gave him :   blessed be the earth that gave .
he stretch'd his arms , and terrible and wild ,
his harp of ivory sheen , from shoulders broad ,
little barrels , roped and tarred , all full of brandy - wine ,
" no , thou hast no cause for weeping ,
and tangled golden hair .
when lo ! as parted by an angel 's hand ,
its own existence , of remotest glooms .
glance that definitely said : " flight is at your peril . "
a shawl , whose folds in cashmire had been nurst ,
then pulls more line and whips a longer reach ,
" but thou hast breathed such purity , thy lay
and there defied their enemy , the spring ;
the whole world through :
in verse form , xii .
and smiled her thanks -- though nigh too weak -
of those beautiful hands that i love so much ,
retrospect of their past misconduct .
baring its tender feet to every roughness ,
within ourselves throughout the ticklish quest
a - washing with the breaking of the day , and i will follow
up de hill an ' down de level !
it makes the servants quickly greater
these with the wo nt of power perplex the will .
can ever forget ?
even with a parent , where persuasions fail ,
" lost a day ? "   " yes ; if not rude ,
no shade , no shine , no butterflies , no bees ,
the trumpets and the neighings and the drums .
over seas hath taken wing :
in thine esteem , and sin against the gods . "
but when love 's bonds were torn apart ,
to make me downy - cheek'd as in my youth ;
what was his furthest mind , of home , or god ,
sad memory brings the light
up to the moon is cast--
another way he went , and soon among
who 'll dig his grave ?
would i your justice or your force express ,
those five small ships lay silent in the gloom
and every night re - echo songs of god :
is as the book of god before thee set ,
no more to tell of damon 's tender sighs ,
and separate , one by one . slender tassels
and had its funeral the day before :
already some presag'd the dire event ,
if you talk about plymouth and one bunker 's hill . )
he 'll _ talk _ his _ principles_--and they
that are rattling by their sides .
song ! made in lieu of many ornaments ,
the sun returns . "   it was no palace - hall
like what you _ do _ , and what you _ say _ ;
execution at their hands and died in exile . the verse of
and then wine with the fleeces till one !
i myself am also shapely ;
issued in form of words , such as my heart
nor can three divide a squirrel ,
eloquently , softly speaking .
had climbed a leman of that lady fair ;
let mutual joys our mutual trust combine ,
not to break her bad habits , but only to hide .
the bantling of his idle brain,--
which binds our states
and , shining through the watery foliage dim ,
the dog sat in a chair .
folly , from cradle to burning ,
but , as the case to me appears ,
and kind incomparable fayre
it is too late to ask my heart in return for yours .
love makes us blind and selfish : otherwise
to guard him ' gainst forgetting .
while than even king midas he boasts longer ears ;
that had you beheld the unfortunate child ,
thou seest how not i alone but all
shouting they came , " a little rest thy step .
there he lay , the head -- my breast keeps the warmth where
stood up and to the vale and mountain played :
you say you never saw one ;
in whose dread name the nation 's sword he drew .
ent'ring the port ; a bark she was of ours ,
below -- the waters pitiless--
were ripe , they might make six - and - twenty springs ;
what radiant legions rise !
and lightnings rent the cloud ; and ruksh , the horse ,
victory ; and pausing as she saw him kneel
where now she crowns him and herself with flowers ,
on him with threat and curse she ever cried ;
grasp you with the monster 's claws ;
faire fortune ’s clearest streame doth gild .
he falls on earth , pulled headlong from his horse .
this time , till out of it there spilled and flashed
they left the winter at their backs
she that is bound , and yet fain would be free,--
thy sire saw the light that shone
as she moved , her earrings jingled ,
yonder a maid and her wight
but beats it down again ;
then bright gandharvas met his view ,
astra quidem vellent ; vellent aeterna pacisci
" it 's breead or blooid , " they cried . " we 've nowt to eat ;
they haunted me -- the shadows of those faces in the street ,
where the waters are deep ,
or whether we shall lose the precious time ,
lift the meal , and sift it quickly ,
and volunteers around his banner swarm ;
who once said all his say , when he was young !
or els a whyle hath at the scoles bene
he might have worked for ever .
{ 134 } the names syra and ortygia , on which island a great part of
when thou that charming lay repeatest ,
an ' inglis fussled as he cross'd the muir ;
was mantled over in the days of old ;
and hole upon a wall to make ,
excruciating torments , and is seized with such violent fits of
who call this a grave--
" o jock , sae winsomely 's ye ride ,
and the weekly local paper ,
and die in the peeling steam ? "
in the unnatural glory of the hour ,
grief is for near and little things . but pride ,
without a stop shot they ;
long ago .
there 's nae gathering now , lassie ,
creator , slayer , conjuror , solon - mars ,
it 's safest to let ' er alone :
the morning it was foggie ;
that onward passes , dar'd to counterfeit
some sidled up the stairs :
shall it not be so with mine ?
the yoke is spurned , the chain is broken ;
there is rapture in the sound as it fills the sunshine round ,
to mingle with the gods ; yet will i go :
they cry , from yawning waves ,
which our gentle uncle samuel
" and so long after what happened here
that aided the commanding eye
lxi . youth 's endearing charms are fled .
obeyed their chief 's heroic call;--
save that her maker being one who dwells
those unto others , this to me .
thus to his guests the host spake : / " that ye more safely fare ,
to view each fat worm as a prize
the clanking lash , and goring of the steel .
came lovely sounds adrift from silver lute ,
to me , who must be saved because i cling with my mind
thy hermitage e’en now have sought ,
and sees a sweetheart in the sacrifice .
awoke such solemn thoughts as suited well
with shuddering horror pale , and eyes aghast ,
and oft as he lay on his deathbed he sighed
' beside , ' quoth the mayor with a knowing wink ,
but that highest,--what is it ? the gentle radiance of triumph
proudly o'er the good and brave ;
--io giurai per san bernuto
( wy i 've worked out to slarterin ' some fer deacon cephas billins ,
so screams a goose where swans melodious sing .
attended him , with troops behind .
the tender trees , and many a boar .
their wines of setia , cales , and falerne ,
mary e. burt and w. t. chapin , ph.d . ( princeton )
and clasp each brother 's hand ,
o , whistle , and i 'll come to you , my lad ! "
  the shechinah , called sakfnat in the koran.--see _ sale 's note _ ,
_ chorus . _                most unseemly woe
urge to yon walls the mercian 's direful king?'"--
will never learn to bow
( in england ' twere a rook ! )
upon his humblest followers ! "
stand aside , men of rome ! here 's a hangman - faced swiss--
and in his hand a sword full bright and keen .
are not worth a glance :
the lars and lemures mourn with midnight plaint .
“ the forest can hear , and the mead can view ,
ballad - minstrel , that the translator must imitate the
and rollant 's strokes on three terraces knew ,
with the emerald surges of wood and wold
the flowers burst round our feet ,
heaps of ashes on his forehead .
unknown fear .
never looked with any complacency on his situation in the
fulfil the larders , and with strength'ning bread
an ' each took aff his several way ,
and fell in love . was _ that _ all , viola ?
had borne the lad , and sent him forth to troy 's beleaguering
what a clatter ,
" why tarry ? come hither
and i tickle their ears and pull their tails
so on they march , and in the pursuit join .
  from the 1815 edition .
quisquis adest , faueat : fruges lustramus et agros
ah ! whence is that flame which now bursts on his eye ?
laughs the sweet greek of pan 's old madrigals .
through the choir of nightingales
through theyr falsë playe .
nor can i think that god , creator wise ,
from tenedos , what time achilles sack'd
thus will end the days of trouble
truth never was indebted to a lie .
unthought of both , some other form of strife ; "
the dark - haired maiden loved its grassy dells ,
" brickbats and tiles , "
pursue not the beautiful youth .
pine that the north wind whinneys through --
and it blew the curls , a frolicsome race ,
was it the fact ? '   ' no ! '   ' on my word ? '
“ so spurns the truth the prophet told in vain .
and you -- you feed the rogues with bread--
has the hostess filled with wisdom ,
to the low porch it scantly blossom'd o'er ,
from this encumbering virility ,
of martial truth , that must prevail ,
showed delight as cats express it .
there the song sung shines as a picture wrought ,
( x. ) the invasion of babylon by the medes ( pp . 87 , 88 ) .
thou hast me forsaken ;
now high , now low , now master up , now miss , }
of goodly creatures vanish ; and mine eyes
" one puff
and once in a while ; he 'd smile:--
i 'll carry him to the grave .
this way no righteous soul has ever gone ;
" o staye , o staye , thou goodlye youthe ,
in deep discernment .   lastly this , from whom
forth they went together
oh , dreary day , that had so late a dawn !
with which i in my humble way
it is in failure , in distress ,
then i do a little sinning
rending her garments , and her belly showed me ;
kissing her hair ?
he that " suitor ! suitor ! " singeth ,
points east and west and makes the whole world one .
and nature holds this like a mirror up
this breed of wolves is the most numerous of all the carnivora in
" come after us , and thou shalt find the cleft .
walk across the flooring 's planking ,
οἶδα γὰρ πολλοὺς βροτῶν
he would not leave norfolk without being caress'd .
i 'm lifted into the saddle
they had much to say .
the breath of life ; o more than poor men wealth ,
but that thou oughtest agayne to hym be kynde .
i will find out where she has gone ,
for sure , to warn us , jove his omen sent ,
then the voice
and twilight saints , and dim emblazonings ,
more to the south , the phrygian waves confine :
more bright than may - day morn ,
the lovely dames implore the courtly train ,
listener up there ! what have you to confide to me ?
away to the ship of achilles . they placed them in his tents ,
marna of the quick disdain ,
o woman ! loveliest of the lovely kind ,
i was forced to go to london
the lords next ; then the commons :
they dipp'd their swords in the water , and did tease
and shortly to speke wysdome is more laudable
then wise penelope answered him : ' ah ! stranger , would that
what poet give , even in his noblest lays ,
gifted with words , so apt to speak thy thought !
men fill'd with might and valor , firm themselves
to pray for that thynge , whiche he can nat endure
she knows , nor growth of man in grisly brute ;
false and unsated as the eunuch ’s lust !
i run too with ease ;
blue violets for mine eyes .
the gist of life , the end of ends -
' twill query--"what use to thee , incomplete spright
moved lightly by the freshening breeze which blows .
to enforce her sacred law ,
after that his sons dispensed the treasures : they
are seen by the spirit , and not by the sight .
mankind 's foe . and his mother now ,
thus he said to us , and since one enjoys drinking in proportion
and , more than hellas taught of old ,
but no such melting glances meet ,
in some measure , alas ! to her own loss and hurt
the engines which in them sad death doo hyde ,
but more cheer is when ] may
and its broad face richly glows
henry vii . 's chapel -- having obtained a lease from robert
like senile suns that grapple with the dark ,
to her , calista proved her conduct nice ;
he scholde him waisshen overal ,
i can not in the future look
there , all is order and loveliness ,
and , rushing forward , form a moving shed .
me of dishonor . oft i wished me dead ,
our soul 's bold heights in a material dress .
nor bring the secrets of the gods to light .
stop thine ear against the singer ;
the solemn butchers ; calm in every face
showeth its incompetence
new laws to be observ'd ; for i descrie
advance at distance , while i pass the plain
del helado invierno ,
now and then mark'd faces of sorrow or joy ,
leaning from my childish knee ;
fair the tints of op'ning rose ;
with their white pleading faces turned upward
" but if , to aid our sovereign , duty call ,
presented bare against the storm , plods on ;
so to me ,
nor is great hector lost by me alone ;
still such and were to come near these suitors , they would have
that could harness a team with a logical chain ;
i break the seal -- o heaven ! my mary yet
more precious to each other than all the riches of the earth .
the sea is flecked with bars of grey ,
where the cold sea - maids rise to sun their streaming hair .
' gainst storm , and wind , and tide ,
even when i told him not to do so . when he went all unattended as
for honest men and bonny lasses ) .
unnoticed was suffered the evening to pass .
she spoke as woman can .
and entered ; and the mists grew bright ,
vainly he had undertaken
the equal of the earth in size.(775 )
but john he cried in vain ;
baskets , in the midst of whom a boy played sweetly on a shrill
dead , whom we buried ; more than one of us
sink , o my soul , in this golden glory ,
but the day wears . go now , pausanias ,
and had hobbled in the kitchen--
forestalls ; and , by forestalling , proves it sure .
long wars for slight pretences made ,
lightly bounding together ,
from out the silver scabbard of the east !
which gazes out at me
say , on the level , fellows , just a year ago to - day
he , when his help is needed , comes in aid ,
false fears are foes -- truth tatters those ,
but just inside your doors
it answer'd : " from the day , when it was said
from meddling evermore .
teacher and taught , friend , lover , parent , child ,
" and when we 're at a loss for words ,
she did not say a word about her own wedding , for she did not
and still with favour singled out ,
with grace divine : her power admits no bounds ;
' tis said that in that favored place
i come not in among you in rebellion ,
but since not always wind and waves convey
so guiltless she securely gives good cheer
that stands above the rock :
which with such force he brandish'd in his hand ,
to the town hall came flocking :
while o'er her callow brood she hung ,
vainly is your silver offered ,
prince and evangelist ,
" a cup of chocolate ,
when , eyeing the two warriors , now more near ,
be not proud , but now incline
nor[25:1 ] think the hours do move too slow ;
known that nero instituted games called neronia which were
love thy dreamy ' witching eyes
his mother 's doves and team of sparrows ;
what of the incantation
as long as cattle shall roam at will
for , now , one sings of heaven and one of hell ,
from the lodges of a village ,
shelley 's position in the _ defence _ , it may be added , is in total
the angels , happening that way ,
this son began to edge upon the father ,
of lamb i 've but a quarter left ,
the ass approaching next , confess'd ,
then when the fire domed blackening , i found
i hold him but an unwise man
they made their way to open air ,
take better counsel with thy heart , and show
she bowed her singing head on michael 's breast .
nor what god blessed once , prove accurst .
insurance safe as thine .
and goodworth 's people were not used to play .
the nymph will change , the chord will break--
more singly eminent for virtuous deeds .
first , and with one swing he hurled it , and he put forth a
and what it guards is brittle .
they have laid him away ;
( _ on her sea - cliff in leucady _ )
and sheep on the hills ;
whether merry or sad ,
thrice twenty cupids unperceived flew
in gladness , lifted up my shameless brow ,
a while he paused , and then , " since he is silent , " said the poet
as thought 's pinions are unfurled ,
and wild heart all aflame .
" jam , and jelly , and bread
from the theater under the city 's lights follows the girl
by a stately lady 's knee ,
and lick its ancient bole for little good :
we must go and do our bit !
o , do not be too happy!'--'if i understand you , i 'm bowled ! '
left the corpse behind us in the hall of circe , unwept and
her name of " bright and morning - star " to him,--
fashioned by unlearned breath ?
and ev'ry wrinkle on my brow
or her determination !
for those who gave so cheerfully :
of their passions and their spites ;
an ' swing that good ol' we'pon we used t ' call " horse sense " :
to act so nearly what we will .
they contrive to make double
and time is done .
a yellow purse i saw with azure wrought ,
judge , gentlemen ! if i deserue not thanks ?
after the folys hode alway to ren
and high permission of all - ruling heaven
aloud,--“evoë , ho!”--and bursts the door ;
and drink the very flower away .
my breath will not be obedient to its organs ,
now not a joy has life to give ,
which lightened ever all along their rear .
he saw a star was fair and bright
let us by the fire
dim anguish of the lonesome dark ! --
rank within rank , on buckler buckler spread ,
the great masters and kosmos are well as they go , the heroes and
would'st thou to run the gauntlet these expose
and that rogero , second of the name ,
death cut still deeper in her heart :
" ' tis clear , " cried they , " our mayor 's a noddy ;
the secret lore of rural things ,
she is not fair to outward view
a corpse will never find me in the house ;
and while in plenitude of power he went ,
ceases my love , her words , her ways ,
and thistles bear berries in every place ,
ah , they are priceless , the pale and the ivory and red !
then turned and ran towards me , her large eyes
solvet sæclum in favilla ,
the monarch " flaunts his robes of state , "
and seeing that i did n't want for brass ,
meantime avoid my glittering spear , but oh
for he that shoteth for such a wager
despair made some run headlong gainst their fone ,
" ' so seize them by their thumbs ,
yn faen - gwaddan i bob gweddi ,
thus to his son telemachus he spake .
may be the signer of a temperance pledge ,
from the mine and from the gully , from the hunting trail ,
" bad luck to inventions of this modern age ! "
viewless things his eyes can view
why is buda fairer than erdelska ?
uneasily shaking their dark green manes .
th ' unlettered stones , all artless works of art ,
sable hunters of the northland
how hope succeeds despair on each captain 's countenance !
the saintly folds , that shaded her fair brows .
the lady then added some generalities of opprobrium with some
it bucked and reared
cap : paderewski 's out of sight !
age is full of care ;
at length , in tears , the aged phoenix spoke ,
que viene de lo alto arrebatada ,
the grim , ungarlanded carouse
and heat upon the summer and the sun ,
and i made reply :
he said there was something in falls he admired ,
wild april , enkindled to laughter and storm by the kiss of
i was not ware that i was wafted up
we 've paddled furtively ,
mirry makyne said him till
thou too must die !
" i am just as well pleased it should _ not _ be the king ;
but o ! life 's lang !
with a long pole to disturb it . "
spink , spank , spink ,
the human seems to fade away ;
violently back ? but set the same numbers to another sense :
within the arms of him , the fire - distilling ,
oft he would lead her to the flowery lawn ,
thy sire complies;--but that too beauteous face ,
yet dare i say godfredo means , i know ,
rises high in the breast ,
duran , diego , quoted ,
' come , listen ! here is proof that you were missed :
and left it without stain
hearing so many knocks , single and double ,
striving , who ne'er attain ,
ye have been very kind and good
objections violate the dignity .
herdsmen and horns and the glacier - glow .
tumultuous noises filled the hall ;
" but if ye keep him well in hand ,
thus far that learned critic barten holyday , whose interpretation
" can add one curse to the foul thing i am!"--
till i obtain that little ' yes ' or ' no ! '
nelly o ' bob 's o ' t ' crowtrees .
that we to you our festive laurels owe ,
only the blameless offering .
but what meant this legend , pray :
sang , in its bloom ;
to mortal men great loads allotted be ,
passed the morning , the noon :   came the even --
who seeks the good of all . ”
' o , i fear ye are poison'd , lord randal , my son !
must be the passage to some other shore
beneath the trees , or by the glimmering lake ,
with many an ymage of entaile ,
all doff for her their ornaments ,
and lay him down to sleep at ease ,
each gloried in their wanton part ;
( ll . 1263 - 1284 ) an hundred and twenty numbered winters in the
and the snow with its devilish and silken whisper ...
saepe pater dixit ' studium quid inutile temptas ?
your every subject , free from pause or haste ;
the stair descended , and regained his horse .
you 've got to dig from week to week
sent to represent lancaster ,
above the loftiest ridge or mound
return bright nymph , attractive as admired ,
burn down the trees on xanthus ' banks ; himself
at midnight , each by the other awfuller,--
' t was on a lofty vase 's side
in vain they fought , in vain they sail'd ,
now for thy glory 's sake ,
let foplings sneer , let fools deride ,
so dull and damp and another day ,
with her arms of strength and beauty ,
o most exceeding grace divine ! to whom ,
waste no time , my dauties , in mournin ' for me . "
hence , not to use water for drink ,
as he who goeth yonder undertook ,
the service must be read . "
whose want too well now feels my friendless case ;
the sumpter - mules are girt on ground ,
if in those times the thunderbolts prevail
he looked out to the pearly east ,
and gowns that eve are furnished for the three ,
for michael angelo to join us here .
if i were young i would try a new alignment--
_ o wistful , fragile faces , few out of many ! _
the inheritance of my fathers unto thee .
_ the flame of passionate hunger in their eyes ; _
with desp'rate courage , turning so to bay ,
and we must catch the witching words
little hands were made for folding ,
panes , that flame with gold and crimson ;
with sun - warmed leaves and blossoms bright ;
unstintedly , prodigally ,
quom frustrast , frustra illum dicit frustra esse .
may bear the scar of you .
for as the double stars , though sundered far ,
of other creatures , as him pleases best ,
a thousand finer touches more
atrides ? how with want of warlike zeal
who hold by wrong that wee should have by right .
came to peiraeus who received him gladly . then all the
from naked stones of agony
must the good schoolmaster make me
among the sons of men . "   and while he paused
wisely has the poet sung .
but the little toy friends are true !
but ye who own that higher law
circumstance , therefore , is brought into view , the mixture
to the spent beast , which whined , and fawned , and quaffed
walk be bright !
where of his worth no heritage remains .
with what calm scorn the unicorn ,
who sporting on some giddy height
" i have a very humble apartment , " he said ; " but if monsieur and
hast been a son , and evermore shalt be ,
for when that he himself concluded had ,
and beckoning the zephyr spake anon
the bugler 's first communion
for an alighting mine .
until the candle 's lighted ? even his form
o spare an augur 's consecrated head ,
in crib to shroud his head .
here or hereafter , hath in store for me .
by wood and vale , its onward current keeps
who to such starved endeavor
in one vast wave , which ever strove
weel may the cheek be wet wi ' tears ,
only a _ sense _ of supplication,--
some thought him saluting his sally 's and nancy 's ,
so gradual one passion slowly died
she says girls in a hurry to marry ,
and hid its yawning jaws and treacherous springs
eclipsing his sun 's disk .
and to seek her son was raking
when , ' bove the white horizon ,
such loveless kindnesses there are
such the strength was in his fingers .
next from each sun how spheres reluctant burst ,
though in his country town no lictors were ,
the sheriff 's angered now !
“ and tread our footsteps , while of yonder mount
as xanthus delug'd in the cause of troy .
“ why this deed , as god shall recompense thee ! ”
while fairy fancy far before
i sprung as genius of the stream ,
honourably ascribed to his personal character :   he who , if he had
and sound of song so softly
has been , like thee , a motley waste
did for awhile together lie
and chaw the tender prickles in her cud ;
  dennis notices that this couplet is borrowed from roscommon 's
margaret ( walking towards home )
let the english rake the bay ,
let us by the fire
stiff - jointed father of a family , whose " back hair " makes good
everybody else , then , going ,
the death of a soldier 's the only death worth dying .
home , home , home--
you and your bar .
with saddest music all day long
and barkings without measure .
the untasted viands , and the jovial bowl .
i walk to love and life alone
andrea , jacopo da sant ' , xiii . 133 .
the dove directs , well pleased , returns the lay .
as crowding through the frith of clyde
from thrace . diomed killed their king with the twelve bravest of
she died and left to me
like some bright angel o'er the darkling scene ,
doors that june set a - swing
the vague embankment , light on light .
there warn't no stoves ( tell comfort died )
his heires , whan he were of dawe ,
through pain up by the roots thessalian pines ,
yet still his grateful heart shall own ,
kind teacheth us , nature commands us this . '
and crimson marigold ,
the bottome yeallow , like the golden grayle *
silent unto us in their far - coursing ,
at breakfast , then , it would befall that sister jane would say :
who has fallen in the fray .
dead , my father and my mother ,
binds their brows with nimbus bright ,
yet art 's production may in honor stand ,
now pray you what
in seeing , not in   loving , which of sight
" ode to a sky - lark " sort of men ;
solved is the riddle of the grand desire
" out of a river - reed music for man ! "
what others talked of while their hands were still ;
night , spirits , ghouls , nor ravenous wild beasts ,
and calls up phantoms of strange shape and hue ;
and so beareth he his brethren ,
quite at a loss ( for all his darts were spent ) ,
but still he fluttered pulses when he said ,
borne with whom like a nightmare 's incubus ,
i became a saucy fellow ,
drooped , in his stately tower ,
now help thy - self , and leve it not for slouthe .
slept , and thus sleeping , thither flew
shall one day be your own .
a mystery remains alike to fools and sages .
the subject took so strong a growth in me ,
of the orient morning sky that was
and then , if you scold him , he looks up so meek ;
my little feet , my little hands ,
and slow , with wistful gleams of light ,
where the charmed spirit flowers
whence and what art thou , execrable shape ,
the crescent moon , in the may - days dead ,
she rushed , to cause the trojans to behold
i , too , the body of my brother slain
the title is so common in our mouths ,
as wandering by her mother 's side ,
i might do more .
t ' advance him to the meed , which he had earn'd
or where , by sedgwick 's side , its waters pour
the knight did , blissful , towards her cheek incline--
" if luck but shone on righteous blades ,
the emperor of the kingdom dolorous
heavens ! can my pigs compare , sire , with pigs royal ? "
and when the summer came again ,
“ well art thou come , my brother dear ,
a blue - behinded ape , i skip
dark rolling sheets , forth belch'd from brazen wombs ,
like a bright banner woven by the sun .
with cheering words , and wishes of success .
evil - tempered were the forests ,
near to the lovely dame he drew ,
he knowes why the earth 's immoveable and round ,
and enter there the kingdoms void of day ,
our servile offerings . this must be our task
lo ! i unclothe and clear
but being about to die makes clear
i know not if here i was too audacious that i only answered him
from hand to hand her restless shuttle flew ,
proportion , either accompanied with , or prepared for , the well-
that govern the processes of life .
erelong the frozen sod shall mock
if we were they , none knows us what we were ,
baith sides will gae me the blame .
sets all the room a - blaze ,
te us they as examples stand ,
ghostly motionless vapor began to prevail
could but palliate the anguish ,
to guard and foster her for evermore .
because he dared to climb !
with her sky - blue eyes amaze
where he found the mistress baking ,
from lower planes to these high spheres ;
and bid thy dauntless heart return ,
i 'll count very slowly , but you must be
although the prince wards many , in the end
distichum , epistula item quaevis non magna ;
where gurgling sighs and rasping moans,--
when this which is our torment here shall close ,
to work , and love your work ; to trust , to pray
an act embarrassing and mean .
the very pulse of the machine ;
earth worshipped once as deathless .
less for their valour than their heels admir'd
of morn brave men must arm , stern foes to fight .
pale privet - petals white as milk
` through many a stirring sight and stormy scene .
breaks up the surface of the seas ,
seventy - sixth year of his age , with a hat turned up with green ,
over the gloom
i hoped she 'd lose it ; for my love
painted with cherubim
and thei him tolden as thei couthe .
by a limpid mirror 's fires .
save where some ebbing desultory wave
then spake the lady kriemhild : / " that straightway shall be seen .
for immortality .
achaian statues in a world so rich ?
than men in prowess , nor of mortal clay .
and we a part of her wide plan ,
then feats like squire billy 's you ne'er can achieve 'em ;
charming us unaware .
that can check the crimson streamlet ;
what did you see o ' my true love ? "
_ to honied words we list so fain _ .
of love 's concordant purposes , and
as if arrayed for battle : / ' twould make my heart full sad ,
nerved to high purpose was his war - like soul
and five years old is _ old _ !
through the boasting heart of man .
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
awaken no desire to be restored
the son of raghu spoke again :
and william bee , my courier , when dawn emblazed the skies ,
the priests walk endlessly
all sadness but despair : now gentle gales
thou shouldst behold , nor seek to gain the prey . "
when the dreamy night is on , up the hudson river ,
and so in the stillness , with tapers within and stars alight
would you gain of fame a niche ?
“ and do thou hear , my dearest son ,
and this is law and custom grown ,
that strikes me thus -- a sight to shame your zeus !
to the valley from the height ,
has clad a score i ' their last claith ,
' tis no kiss my fair bestows [ secundus ]
while the brimming horn goes round .
tell me , oh ! mighty concourse , have ye seen
but his changed life he needs must carry on ;
on attila , who was the scourge of earth ,
there , as i pass'd with careless steps and slow ,
of this we 'll talk when next we meet ;
did paris reive , and menelaus ache ,
that home manufactures may cease to be worn .
and pimpernel , and the white hawthorn ,
blue - eyed and fair with saxon blood .
his palfrey , white and sleek ,
prized for his knowledge , as the first of seers ;
ismenus first the racing pastime led ,
at morn or eve , i know , dear child ,
of speech , than he doth wish her in her grave .
dust that covers
the cross descends , thy minarets arise ,
citizens of glasgow .
the whole affair , outside and in ,
riding near her highest noon ,
as it used to write on the sky
for i have gone past carin ' . _
banners , fierce songs , rough cheering , women 's screams ;
far seen across the sandy wild ,
saw seven of their children pass away ,
and whines in the dead grass
my passionate love for your beautiful hands .
a babe and a maid without a flaw .
the group of laborers seated at noon - time with their open
roll'd them back voluble , turning again ,
o golden lights and lights like wine ,
but all the gods are now mine enemies ,
but happy in the wild life to the bone ;
to catch a breath of air :
an ' the sun descended on it , in a manner warm an ' bright ;
bring , o bring the melting rain
and you , bright beauties , that inspire
her heaving bosom , lily - white--
so minded , gird thee to the fight , for so
this while the engine which the tempest cold
now sadly pleased , through faded rome i stray ,
" but ' twas the first to fade away .
" thou canst not enter ! " did the god reply .
and nourish now the heather bloom
he stood , and filled with silent awe ,
so came the captain with the mighty heart ;
sang from the meadow .
and froze with icy breath the flickering soul
dank treasure - houses spill their quest
or glittering starr - light without thee is sweet .
of his father 's mansion , vast and splendid ,
when the red dust has cleared , the lonely soldier
the heart may fail that should endure .
wanders and watches with eager ears ,
and hear how the billows are moaning in sleep ,
but no one dare approach , for there a saying rife
chorus : oh ! it ’s broiling , & c.
that i drew the sabre from its scabbard ,
and with how vehement desire it asks
and cast their shadows over all the land ;
hearing my voice implore thee from afar ,
through both the tendons broke the rugged stone ,
when sojourn soon at rou'tor town
now lost , now seen , with shrieks and dreadful cries ;
three times in the months of summer ,
all which soft sleep now banish'd from his breast ,
on the worn and tired feet :
found the woman fair ; to many a bold thanes of the king she
in my deck chair i grow restless .
the sullied olive - branch return'd ,
if e'er i slept , i dreamed of him alone ,                 }
with this poor stick i 'll pass the ford ,
beside their winding border ,
and fill themselves with fighting - rum ,
" come , let the lot decide for whom we die . "
but mucks about in ' orspital where nothing does no good .
the legions marching from the sea
rippling with his bright prattle ; and then , hours
it can not be declared we are
the freshness of the elder lays , the might
like a tower of vantage stood:--
of the tuba , or vale of el liwa ;
and precious kindred to be found by souls
whose garden wrestles with the dew ,
and with the bough he smote the lands
that the greatest roof is but a banner
men may die of imagination ,
athwart my soul and bear my spirit down .
t ' have found in me this sudden change ;
honor that is a friend begets a friend .
can make our later pleasures shine ,
you can not bag a single stag ;
let 's have another picture of the dawn .
not for an hour could i endure
shed their selectest influence ; the earth
" all that nature yields was there , vying with the rarest hues .
i have slain the sturgeon , nahma ;
my herald , fine and tall !
her presence there , and her name ,
for pavia , thoughtless of her eastern graves ,
if i with thee must share my chamber ,
deserves the man whose deed ,
e'en the visions that i see
flinging , flinging ,
his malice , and with rapine sweet bereav'd
over the countryside--
and though you 'll not be seein ' , we 'll be standin ' by
some born to live a month -- a day -- some less ;
is mine and yields to none ,
since first the winner of the fleece
pure hangs the silver crescent
--'sayeth that such an one was born and lived ,
homesteads on the hudson side !
" and it 's late as it is and i have n't a penny--
what seest thou ?
the crowd , " what wilt thou at my hands ? "
such and so numerous was their chivalry ;
the vulgar use of the word _ memory _ is too unlimited for our
wha could behold thy rosy cheek
agreed he grew handsomer , sleeker , and bolder .
--as some grave tyrian trader , from the sea ,
before him , numberless lovers smiled and talked .
thus , from their praise , i hope to claim
by prophets seen afar :
yet mixed with joy , assailed me , for i knew
lonely and sorrowful , seeking his land ,
beat back the hands that upward yearned -- '
his horse was of an iron grey ;
a silent counter part of ...                          ms .
and i was scarce of mood to comrade her
is that the wall is strong ;
shall make penelope a theme of song
and turned their star - herds loose to roam
must hear , first uttered from my orchard trees ;
and ditton girls are mean and dirty ,
listen ; said my heart ,
i 'll read it ; shall i , friends ?        ( _ they clap . _ )
seemed to be saying : " give me vengeance , lord ,
" wilt ever make an end ? " quoth he , " behold
and all the grecians slain ) to have return'd
" no , no , " said the snail , with his hard coat of mail ,
whene'er i go , or whatsoe'er befalls
into one tissue of belief and love ,
sche was wel tawht , sche was wel boked ,
cutty , short .
might try each the other in the matter of labour , fasting
meet wi ' me , or , whan it 's mirk ,
at length , with love and wine at once oppress'd ,
remained with the phaeacians where it was , so had i come to
the muddy groundswell lifts and breaks and falls and slides away .
was all a dream ? to think that all was dreamt
and honourable for my loss , to hell
for the fair circassian .
that no man schemed it is my hope -
ha ! bring me the fiery bright dew of the mountains ,
e'er serve thy pleasure in life to impair .
wings swift in flight ;
what they suffer and endure ;
for to the font we go
but voices low and gentle ,
the other sinks . we came , however , at length , up to the point
and in the breasts of kings and heroes glows .
sensi equidem gravius carmen .   nunc cetera pastor
' mid alien tribes to roam ;
and gripped his mate and desperate he fought to gain the shore ;
as , compass'd with a wood of spears around ,
from hills , that looked across a land of hope ,
then ' neath the hall 's high roof - tree / a mighty din arose .
thy name , said he , shall certainly
whispered sweet and fleet ,
slipped in , with slimy venom , and the pest
that come were certain strangers ; the host to ask began ,
  " some of the camels have bells about their necks , and some about
our woods , with juniper and chesnuts crowned ,
money spent you can not spend ;
and he spake to the noble river
that raised us from the dust , and placed us here
and the poor _ sham _ devils didnt like it at all ;
because this dog in playful mood
of this much lov'd , much honoured name !
attained to years of indiscretion ,
' say , what art thou , at others thus to shout ? '
in his maker 's mercy put his trust
makes the vow he will not keep .
doves wing frighted from the ground
and then i heard pulling off the bark .
to make himself the richer .
while the war drifts away , forgotten at last .
where the fish , with joy unstilled ,
" your martyrs ready to shed out their blood ,
to cherish and console :
you ; nevertheless i will go to the snowy heights of olympus , and
in bliss of bliss ,      where they bring to god
with sighing and trembling and transport--
forsook this little world of vanity and men ?
and purity,--no creatures foul
the eternal order circles round ,
ho ! burghers of saint genevieve , keep watch and ward to - night ;
for when , behind the fairy hill
blasted his years ;
" ' tis i , who smooth the rugged way ,
nor petition parliament ;
many north american indian tribes , but especially those of the
history of iason .
that 's just to anoint
he slydeȝ on a slou{m}be , slep slogh{e } vnder leues ,
sir charles murray of ratcliff , too--
between two maids the enamour'd one .
because together with us they have gone . "
" do n't be sorrowful ,
who didst the largess of our kingly court
at domys day a compt for them shall make
of the glad house ? come , come ,
bounteous and cool from sea
indian mutiny    the indian mutiny now arose ,
alas ! so crowded was the space
that in my secret book with so much care
or baked in a bussa o ' clay ,
himselfe to run , and then they scud away
or lie becalm'd upon the windless deep ,
the whole day died , but , dying , gleamed on rocks
and held them bruised in arms strained stiff and tight ,
the wind be winter if the heart be spring ?
how he met with his fate and the v.p.p .
written for the celebration of the third anniversary of british
seea full o ' bleead , an ' queerly towght ,
crimson - punctured bramble leaves
oh ! had we some bright little isle of our own ,
not wholly expell'd by the world 's usurpature ?
if i had not been intent on another new thing which then
how daur ye do't ?
i -- i have known the tears of harlequin .
the parson 's lean and bony bay
nirus upon him laid he dead ; the spear
mother of pearl , and porphyry , and marble ,
such trembling seiz'd the deep concave and foul ,
the leader must have it -- but no !
my husband 's wounded spirit chear !
my blessing , my treasure , my all things in one ! "
like a wolf 's was his shaggy head ,
then wise telemachus answered her , saying : ' my mother , as
and went forth from his dwelling ; the son of haran , mindful of
then thetis , mindful of her son 's request ,
" we do not know , " he said ,
the future restores us the dead ,
tell he dassent open his mouth for fear o ' talkin ' wrong .
his brother was the branded man of lynn ;
were under her dominion placed .
when things are at the worst they sometimes mend .
of angels he departed still alive out of this fleeting life , in
now shall he taste my spear , that i may see
mesurable , mild , temperate , b. 859 .
awaking from his light repose
i listen to the different voices winding in and out , striving ,
she ca n't get over it ! she never can ! "
till mangled by a vile translating sect ,
to the little gray church on the windy hill .
displayed the ruin and the cruel carnage
i 'll pluck thee , sweet blossom , pure fragrance i find ,
i tremble even so .
and there are times when law itself must bend
tactus aratro est .
that mine are safe within my view ,
suspend the effect , or heal it ?   has not god
with walls of chiselled stone
laid it on the steely rollers ,
_ princes , and such like public lights as these ,
it was geneura who his brother slew ,
the people ’s sad eyes bent on me .
and a loving mother part !
power , wealth , extent , vouchsafed to thee -- with these and like of
and never , never mayst thou want this sword , "
and he wove him a wondrous nose,--
but by the duteous life which looks not forth
of queen elizabeth ’s ruffs ?
lured out to what ?   one dares not think .
yacallea tlamacazecatlo tlamocoyoualca .
to tell thee that i lo'e thee .
the playful children just let loose from school .
for such ill - treatment of my friends .
lifted blue claws at me
on closing lines which -- though it be
so when , next morn , the lord whose life he saved
just at the hour when her sad lay begins
o cuckoopint , toll me the purple clapper
when the sister of him yonder , " and i pointed to the sun , " showed
e’en now perhaps , with toil o’erspent ,
the new and inexperienc'd bird awaits ,
canto xxxiv . lakshman ’s speech .
that his fate unto hers he was wishing to link .
tell me not , in mournful numbers ,
see the awful yankee leering
wilt not let me wander homeward ,
_ sing ho ! and hey - down - derry . _
teeth as long as fen - rake handles ,
with its dark green leaves upon it ;
from " cynthia 's revels "
an ' she 'd blush scarlit , right in prayer ,
what the heart touches--_that _ controls our fate !
heavens ! how he charm'd us with a flow of sense ,
with the soft music of the spheres suppressed
went by my side so many years : this full , fragile
come to the bar !
not i but christ in every look and action ,
_ appius . _ then , lictor , strike !
from all of the sweet flower throng ,
love in thy youth , fair maid , be wise ;
foot - sore and weary , mary tried
stand , not sit .
and thrice ten thousand , on the waves ,
premising no reflection 's meant ,
high in the midst the blue - eyed virgin flies ;
as from the door they crowding broke ,
that world schal lasten endeles .
they fled without a look behind them .
westward to find the world 's true orient .
from vain and vile , to solid and sublime !
inmost chamber , and round them was a frieze of blue , and
i view that groveling idea as one
in mist of dead untimely tide the moon was hidden close .
of the canvas back sort ;
the old alardo conquer'd ; and his limbs
but to the even - song ;
at having come with me to dine :
and when he meets me at the dusk of day
was clouded with care as i walked along . when i got to the gates
but in justice , honour , and pity
upon zerbino 's mood , to kindness turned ,
someone to battle fer besides meself ,
the father may soothe his child to sleep ,
" good heaven ! what active feats yon artist shows !
delightful ! splendid ! glorious !
the mystic harmony of right and wrong ,
such sweet drops of time only flow to be tasted ;
ulterior nostro ripa premenda pedi ?
like these fair children of cloud and frost ,
as a hero had worshipt -- vile , treacherous thing--
for three years after her marriage , theodosia was blissfully
and rod ,
who robs all hearts of rest .
on roofs of memphis and athens
from the others . among them went menelaus himself , strong in
thou need na jouk behint the hallan ,
and the children are crying for bread to eat
lest woe succeed
and still the steeples hum .
this grace , by which my mortal through your realm
in all the neighborhood:--yet the oak is left
and i accept it therefore : but do thou
and say ' twas lost at such a ball ;
if sae their pleasure was .
as benefits forgot :
then shall you discover , that your name was printed down
she took my hand in her thin white own ,
did rebel spirit on the tent intrude ,
my heralds from the dreary deep ,
wilt seek my couch and this that on it lies ,
high sounds thy voice of india 's pearly shore ,
but fallow lie thy wealth and power .
as meted by his measure of himself ,
and she forgot the blue above the trees ,
with tatius , the old king of days , and cures ' hardy hearts .
hopped upon the window sill ,
pues otra vida más larga
for nobody wor hissing or clapping at all ;
sermons and soda - water the day after .
like lovely traceries the frost
and to fan the flames up brightly ,
make earth a heaven , and holiness preponderate .
call'd here elijah in his flaming car ?
your toil is ease , and indolence your care ,
and all the coloured hills and fields were grey ,
how the rainbows hang in the sunny shower ;
leans to his tenderness .
i 've been to london to look at the queen .
until , with ill - concealed distress
o ye bards ,
all duty thou hast scorned , and hence
" we live no more , when we have done our span . "--
when symptoms of all sorts assailed her ,
there when they came , whereas those bricky towres
it seemed my spirit passed
then they are on to the land of france ,
which i delight to do ,
wi ' faith an ' hope , an ' love an ' drink ,
this one excuse was left ; pompeius fled .
it 's the white and the pink i dream of to - day ,
when you came in ;
no season shuts up our campaign ;
the mountain and the squirrel
all pleasures meet in womankind .
the while the thoughts rose in her eyes like stars ,
from whitechapel turnpike to cumberland gate ,
' neath the wolf - prints in the marshes ,
time wearied of my song--
wailing .
it does no prejudice .
prosper , o prince ! i pray for thee
of the miscellaneous collection of verse that follows , only four
thy bark floats idly till thou art within .
the close - set ranks swung into place .
the surface of the earth , in this country , is below the level of
proof against rage and treacherous art
old man of the sea comes up from under the waves , heralded by
reach the loved one , borne there by the wind ,
" i best , " cried one , " of all the band
that hot day
one fault she did commit , i 've heard you say :
vaiśravaṇ once , my brother , wrought
with the lambkins to the glen - wood ,
half - awake servant - maids unfastening drowsy shutters
well may he guide the law by whom law 's maker makes .
i heard a rustic call it so . '
to wonder , " do i dare ? " and , " do i dare ? "
my soul , disdainful and disgusted , sought
and no man knew the secret haunts
and the sparks arose all crackling .
thick as the ghosts that dante saw in hell
complete , as now i see it in my thought .
that here is play , and there is war .
the wind has shaken till it fills the air
till ' cherry - ripe ' themselves do cry .
_ o the sea is hungry ever _ !
ere roy montaine came seeking me to say
by th ' evil talons guarded , where the pitch
a woman 's heart , and burns it out , and leaps
his townsman marius . his hexameters show considerable advance in
lords of all lands afar ,
who knows the aswattha , knows veds , and all .
and ever the sound of the cannon far or near , ( rousing even in
i want to -- but i do not pass my plate f'r them things twice !
i rose to leave,--it was a splendid night ,
found john busy -- and " easy , " too ,
began to meditate his epic muse
while from between their ships the danaï
from her bosom 's deathless embers ,
and comeliness of figure and of face .
on either side the herbage smiles ,
she turned towards me , not in other wise
here could have smiled!--
fulfilling man 's tale of pain .
thy hands are mine , thy hands are mine to hold ,
and thy example others make
“ thus to the test of power their words provoke:--
walk the deck my captain lies ,
he , as before , with whirlwind fury fought .
with many strings , a dulcet tinkling make
his torch is at thy temple door ,
who , shadrach - like , will walk through fire ,
and hou under the firmament
he sent for lancewood to make the thills ;
i heard his last poor cry to wife and child.--
then went she to the minster , / and with her many a maid .
with what an hungry lip the ocean deep
he gave him a great pummelling ,
she raised the arras , opening to the light
and as i watched him
i heard as i lay , a wailing sound ,
what place was there for you , whose different fame
my wife 's a winsome wee
i know not when the wonder came to me
their fear - compelling conqueror .   but in truth
of gold ! dost not with juster measure guide
that carried a dummy coffin . none the less ,
when breathed by the being i love !
when first my way to fair i took
from that day forth the stench of paganism ,
" now must thou make requital / for them that here have died
theocrite grew old at home ;
desire to accommodate sound to sense . at any rate the double
of telamon , captain among the host , shoot on , and be at once the
and he should blind my eyes ...
if we should tap on your pane to - night , dear ,
and one is the kiss you gave to me .
my treasures ; rich , alas ! by robbing mee .
how shall i pray for strength to love him less
whose he was wholly , and so call'd him dominic .
the doors , unbarr'd , receive the rushing day ,
the pass of melfort we explored .
` seven are killed . '   ` my god ! my god ! '
fearing ,
_ fades from the vision here , _
beyond the clouds , in sculking haste repair ,
with the remembrance of a grievous wrong ,
so thus she spake to rudeger , " if i only knew
on comfort snatched , and anguish done ,
by him such dressings were not worn ,
who hast with life imbued
he took them from me , one by one ,
the judge had leave to wend his homeward way .
are needful at the first , as is a hand
moves the tall ship , majestic , o'er the floods ,
he stands , he does not dare to stir ,
somebody wants what i 've strength to supply ,
with a " strong " vowel ( _ a , e , o _ ) to form a diphthong :
a million music - ripples in the air
he shall bear me far to - night . "
hope ,     } comfort him and instruct him .
lich to himself be alle weie
for polish'd steel supplied the warrior 's vest ;
let it pass . i did not know
then in the contest we too may engage ;
if i no longer hail thee   { king and lord
i know not the way i am going ,
in this wide , vulgar world -- what real spot
that robyn had lent his good ,
now to greet
and drank to the pair ,
i 'll land her yet !
like wary cunning foxes ,
with pencil and portfolio ,
all their beauty to complete .
then came the horn again , and three or four
the two close friends of nearly twenty years ,
whose signs remained , and yet will long remain :
exclipit prohemium secundi libri .
head ,
this of verse alone , one life allows me ;
leave thee , leave thee , & c.
vaśishṭha , faithful to advise ,
all breathing human passion far above ,
in the black shade of what obsidian steep
gone from desire , as ghost at last must go ;
let him flee from our board , let him sleep with the slave ,
the swish of the sabre ,
vase retirando atrás ,
how cruel are the parents
and direst poverty and ruinous strife .
said , half aloud , " and here too must i try ,
he takes it so strong that it makes him grin .
even as those dead unepitaph'd , who lie
his courage further in those forests green ;
amen ! amen ! amen ! we dance to death !
can brace the loosened nerves , or warm the heart ;
look'd toward the lower bay to notice the vessels arriving ,
that men call age ; and those who would have been ,
importance , hobbes builds nothing on the principle which he had
to dream of weakness in the all - knowing mind
too bad ! they 're mostly silly boys
ye may have me all your own ,
my cousin pressed my hand with some congratulatin ' jokes ,
as friend remembered not .
with infamy , go thou before !
" lo here the very man ye seek ,
to taste the faery cheer
come after me , and to their babblings leave
how all their shamming plots they would hide ,
and never hear of that country more ! "
as forth they come , those foemen of the north .
once in the vanished years it chanced to please
thence many rivulets have since been turn'd ,
the harping of mortals !
bearing in its flight a spotless rose .   it
the years with diff'ring seasons , months and hours ,
old aaron built it in his day ,
liberty,--and the gospel.--the conclusion of the whole .
reflection , thoughts more kind ,
all obstacles to scatter ;
_ blackwood 's magazine _ ; and by his learned and ingenious articles
and nine nations of women choking with tears .
contributed much to the state of his queen .
pryce would drop a cool hint ,
nor from those appetites sustain'd annoy ,
to us , nor led astray
to raise a flame in cupids of threescore .
and ate the cheeses out of the vats ,
" the vanquish'd bears are trophied on the wall ;
but things like that , you know , must be
your fantasy
but without a groan or shudder ,
bei einer frau wirtin , da kehrten sie ein :
as sit him in a gay parterre ,
to hae been some man 's delight .
oblig'd to return to her father 's once more ,
one night has been as seven
quae rosa mirantes tam nova mutat aquas ?
the flower that , when the air is still
is sometimes quitted by the creature , who
steals o'er the sense with sweetest languishment ?
yon fleecy continents of floating snow ,
and can it be that for me alone
he it was who carved the cradle
wilt thou so love me after death ?
and in the nerve most tender , in his friends ?
but awlus voted blue .
strength added from above , new hope to spring
with darken'd eyelids , and their lashes yet
for them there is no joy in blossomed trees .
how like the dead march of the dead !
like merchant - ships , a various freight to bring
wi ' his milk - white steed and his bonnie black e'e ,
and plank cast rigid shadows ; ' twas a stark
to neptune ’s ear soft sleep his message brings ;
oh ! our childhood 's once delightful hours
in which thy star resplendent shone
through the gross vapours mars grows fiery red
and i reply'd , _ my lord _ . "
ships , knight patroclus , till you have rent the bloodstained
who may be able to hit on some plan for enlisting public
upon the wondering world ;
as diffident as a girl .
softer than gale at morning prime
for scores of fat pigs came again and again :
just cutting the water to foamy white spray !
seek this ! revive , unite it , give it hope ;
the dreadful rising faces of the drowned . _
war left his lair ,
be still the rose that lights the walk ,
half in water , half in air !
explicit prohemium .
a message came right speedilie .
wide lies the great grey plain .
circle together the mystical fire ,
“ not by my pleading may be stayed
the realm and i are ráma ’s : thou ,
ceased the soft voice , for gray mist was descending ,
then frederick was not there of gentle lore ,
whom shall we strike ? who most deserves our blame ?
and i have sinn'd , for it was all through me
where the broad sheepwalk bare and brown
the wraththe which that i now bere ,
my money - bag of shining dreams !   my hours ,
i , too , know well that from its very birth , dear ,
not as the loud had spoken ,
and into the river pitched .
a wee bit inconvenient den
if i should ever by chance grow rich
for theodore , she wandered , slowly turning
and when at last her time drew near ,
till here on the hill , betwixt vill and vill ,
old veterans , re - unite !
christian soldiers , perhaps inconsistent , whether , 407 .
the moon - white lane ,
by winds that sting and blind ,
and has with death and all extremities
thou hast crushed me more and more
of tearful smiles and laughing melancholies ,
glaizie , glossy , shiny .
then wha sae happy , wha sae blest ,
as she blew on her finger - nails :
earliest known instance of barter . ]
though the green fir trees rose up stark and still
had found no passage , for the stone had seiz'd
with wind - blown hair and eyes upon the bay .
i saw she felt she was admired ;
it would be always day .
who roamest here in daṇḍak ’s wild ? ”
as if with envy mov'd to see him there ,
her wondrous robes ; and full the goddess blooms .
the bee him stung therefore .
him by king loeguire ( leary ) that he might not go to tara to
" perhaps there may be bairns , kind sir ,
and victor from the seige peace entertains ;
to the dwelling of ruotus .
thus spake the lord of men , and bent
' tis to woo a bonnie lassie
“ through endless days ; though in thy grief thou ask'st
through grove and garden , undismayed ,
have all turned their colours from yellow to blue ,
she will give a lamb . apparently when it was thought desirable to
but there we would meet ,
will you buy any bacon flitches ,
the happy children ankle - deep
ill suit the like with old di broglio 's heir
and mother 's footstep on the stair
on matters , too , where few can bear one ;
“ and still the words are noted in my breast.--
and through ages , heirs of heirs ,
' twas said , " there goes the honest youth . "
the king of yueeh has snared his foe at last ;
in the garden of her face ,
to breathe you all : come near .
whene'er you are happy and can not tell why ,
and saw the red moon through the heavy mist ,
that my soul it keepeth apart .
and his mistress proclaims , as she tucks up his shawl ,
her myriad nurslings , feeding them
insomuch , that the laws you and yours manufacture ,
to drench with rains from every part of heaven ,
does n't it seem a shame ?
now i say , ah ! well - a - day !
return as dies in air the vesper chime ;
that heaven would drive the fiend away ,
that the bugler yonder prepares to sound ;
as the sea may yet be tamed ,
lay , grim and threatening , under ;
nada te espante ;
with the gourd and the grape luxuriant grew .
at pelletier 's
more hope out of his life than he supposed
hallows a phantom ground--
on the lake or in the cave ,
little sisters , the birds ,
" on their pathway through the woodlands
know how sublime a thing it is
it was the little engel , he
above the nets at sea ?
himself he mingled thine :
of the slow - feeding sheep in the pastures .
one day it fell that siegfried close whisp'ring found the band ,
bright , feverish eyes , and drawn lips ,
hence ! to the water - side , away ! "
soft and silent as a dream .
o'er all the christian land , that seldom thence
i stirred it till the dawnlight grew ,
and glowing sympathy for thoughts of power
cyllene 's god on cleaving pinions plies ,
the point is seen within the supreme soul ,
& lyued i{n } penau{n}ce hys lyueȝ longe ,
" monsieur is dead this many a day . "
that he , had i made little more delay ,
unfamed through life for any fair emprize .
flourished his nut - brown tabor ,
in the song on your bugles blown ,
and both embrace the world .
obey the night , and use her peaceful hours
and flung his b'aver hat at mack , and plunked him in the eye ;
tv qui secura spatiaris mente uiator
on the stones to redness heated ,
that drills the dreadful images of god !
and study of revenge , immortal hate ,
thee , francis , francis , league on league , shall follow
the crowd to find a comrade , whom in a trice he spied .
both table and provision vanished quite ,
there 's something yet behinde ;
and dearest pleasure , is my jean .
of all this wondrous world we see ;
up the swift spiral of its own song whirled ,
o'er rustic swains to bear the rod
while lily buds that shrink from day
of lucca to the pisan .   with lean brachs
oh , how thermometers go up !
barren and formless , spoiled at last by the storm .
at which of his places old rose is delaying !
is pooty gen'ally all round .
shrink at his name , and tremble at his view ,
no longer smiled on waving corn .
the hermit 's solitude with heavenly chear .
their advertisement of may 23 that curll 's notes " had proved not
the strength he gains is from th ' embrace he gives .
who feels too reckless to help himself ?
lest it may more quarrels breed ,
fanned by the breath of the summer air ,
ought less is little ,
but look , and they shower down .
like the ghost of a ship ; two or three widely scattered rocks
their children moulding to the place they dwell ,
ere rolled a world - creating fiat forth ?
then the hearts of the women , with irresistible graces .
the path they take , and speed to reach the town .
becoz we treats each other fair ! '
creature , moulded in the clay of chagrin . he has ,
with goodly chiere and wordes glade ,
so spake the son of othrys , and forthright ,
a thought any more than a deed which might help a
seemed an infernal fury , on her part .
and always into trouble -- i remember once at school
than water ebbs and flows .
we were under the tree where the path turns
his spleen , the chirring grasshopper ,
away behind the currant row
and drive the robber from the door .
there will bid thy children welcome . "
ruby - lipp'd and tooth'd with pearl ;
or blade of grass , or brightest star--
eik and my maiden - heid :
ultima quis tacuit iuuenum certamina colchos ?
rather recall the early light
the snorting beast began to trot , which galled him in his seat .
in what i share with all the rest .
lakes swelled up , and earth was shaken ,
virtute exsuperas , tanto me impensius aequum est
so many unseen hands , smooth down the bed
go ye :   for ye shall find them nothing fell .
recalls that triumph of desire
you can kill me to - morrer if you want to ,
again thy star o france , fair lustrous star ,
i will not take a dreary mind
of charles , that of thy courtesy thou pray
wise the enamoured nightingale ,
that she does penance now for no offence ,
moss - rose , apparently to prevent the depredation of these
which makes men mummies , weighs out every grain
when he galloped into lexington .
the chief who freed these suffering lands
a most exiguously thin burn .
and understood not all was but a shew
and tassets were of iron , and his shield .
the leisure hour is all that thou canst claim .
vainly in broken phalanx clamorous
  " sincere " in its present use is the opposite of " disingenuous , "
on her eyes forbear to strike her ,
and in india who for the soma juice flew , and to men brought it
though pining away with love .
and i have seen the moon
its dear renounced delight ,
still , make yourself comfortable , drink your wine , and listen to
pulls up the flotsam of regret .
and with him he brought time and a new sense
still thine own its life retaineth;--
he leads , with flickering candle , through the heaps
now guessed a hidden meaning in his arms ,
the broken - hearted bride !
will be brought , thou poor heart , how much nearer to thee !
to clothe the corpse , and send with honour home .
" long as ' t is lawful for me , shall my steps
prythee , ove , let me flee . ”
in herbage , hira ; pheræ stately - built ,
to let them know if war should come
" what avails sun 's earth - felt thrill
and on kalevala 's whole people .
gleamed for a second on the startled crowd ,
of that larger life , and rarer
forth from thy dreamland thou , a dreamer , cam'st
you sailor - clerk , you salted puritan ,
the distant scene,--one step enough for me .
grant that alcinous may do all as he has said , for so he will
basks in the glare , or stems the tepid wave ,
at length the foolish flie , without foresight ,
thy downie finger ; dwell upon their eyes ,
it never done no good to me ,
the lovely , cultured landscape , waving grain ,
sic pleasure to renew ? "
i have lived , i have loved,--thy child , oh take now ,
and it moved in her agony ( because it was the end ! )
’ tis our mother — we will greet her ;
not hastily on the journey / i pray thee yet to start .
her healing lethe - balm !
like to a twilight , or that simpering dawn
and the blows were three
on the green bank , by this soft stream ,
or blush , at least . she thanked men,--good ! but thanked
dat . vus (= uus ) ,   yow , you ,     hem , hom ,          hit .
--but that glory for which i burn
and the mother - heart within me
to be held dreadful . o my england , crease
lost in his meditations .   what may be
amidst them,--now in form of camers known ,
no home his own by night ;
yet sees them take a million from the claims to left and right ?
he marks the bounds which winter may not pass ,
and the little gods whispered . . . .
the gale is piping loud ;
a letter , achmet ?
glance quick in the bright sun , that moves along
stayes not on man ; to god his tower intends
and efte aros and gan to stonde ,
in one high moment of inspired bliss ,
“ and be in temples worshipp'd is thy care ,
will check the sigh , and stop the rising tear ;
worm , nor snail , do no offence .
his horse , and turned his rein , to fly the peer :
with prayer and holy verses blessed
the way at last .
lived over on the other bank , right opposite to him .
before his setting .   as the earth rolls round ,
evander 's town . all hurry to the gate ,
feelings , his sojourn in strange places and the attendant
" history of the revival of learning ; " and i have heard him speak
saw their faults flaunted,--
who to that sweet bread unprepar'd doth come ,
and fall into deception unaware ,
but though unarm’d , yet clad in terrors , go !
whose heart beats high , who burns to join the fray
with civic blood a fortune they amass ,
yet nor the lays of birds , nor the sweet smell
venerable man know when the two maidens ... were
but if they see she is not afraid
right on de kossack spears ,
two henchmen beckoned , who pitched sheer with force ,
than all the greater sum of life--
o wild west wind , thou breath of autumn 's being
there will i wait till he , restored ,
o'er the sea of milith , and the strait of strongbow ,
revenge that knows no rein ,
and with a cross the host confessed .
him in need of the protection francis and his sister gave
' take thou my churl , and tend him curiously
earth - encircling neptune , mercury bringer of good luck and
" why should i pray to ruthless heaven ,
an all - prolific , all - preserving god !
thou wert made a priestess
her silver - mantled plains ;
clothed you in immortal raiment . the nine muses also came and
i drew men 's faces on my copy - books ,
“ here dwells , ” ’ twas thus the seer began ,
to you one end of a piece of wood
of stature such , of such a mode ,
her throne had fallen -- her pride was crusht--
then hiss’d his arrow , and the bowstring sung .
and death ’s sad hour is nigh ,
success shall come to you
alike , through clear and clouded skies ,
i made a boat , i made a town ,
by men through rouguish tricks in trade ,
the troubles that come with the day ,
will , instant , publish in the ears of all
still northward to the distant side
and so she trod the poppies there ,
and always keep a - hold of nurse
_ o - sei _          " the refined,"--in the sense of " clear . "
ah ! few were the days of the rover
mr . makepeace was bred an attorney .
the tickled ears no heart - felt raptures raise ;
and holds of this , and all worlds , the key .
more mongrels rush forward , all eager to tell ,
dazed by that arrow ’s violence .
their hours when fancy drifts to song
--slow out of earth , before the festive crowds ,
wainamoinen , ancient minstrel ,
of mischief . search thy fertile breast , and break
of dust whirls , dropping lumped :   near thunder speaks ,
think not my affections may !
to mouth in music of the meaningless ,
too fair to worship , too divine to love .
when i weekly knew
of living radiance play'd , and left me swath'd
that fro the great linnadge of gods his pettegre shooteth . "
that , long as he lived , on saint patherick 's day ,
each turn'd his face with a ghastly pang ,
the place where his horses stood waiting for him at the rear of
so shalt thou slumber down the rest of time ,
some in thy " slip - boxes " and honeymoons
which cutting off through hasty accidents ,
hurling away whatever would oppose .
fair venus ' train , appear ,
( once , o , the unvoiced music of my heart ! )
no pony whinnied in its stall ,
what vessels are building , what cargoes amassing ;
neu populum antiqua sub religione tueri(576 ) .
i sat very still ,
" i saw thy pulse 's maddening play ,
and thus with visions only ,
the gentle pride , the lordly state ,
with gold -- the forward seed of sin and vice--
the shadowy vales with feeding herds ,
then heigh ho , the holly !
the mantuan mov'd him , still was i debarr'd
war is hell -- war is hell,--
o blinding hour , o holy , terrible day ,
" lemminkainen , son beloved ,
its power unconsciously full many a time,--
to do with these foul and calamitous needs ?
eros , the little god , and wise ,
so they grew up in joy and glee ,
an image of friendship to place on the shrine .
even in a little space , both good and ill ,
and sítá will be happy there .
instead of the cross , the albatross
as its bordering poplars bent
their good kind hearts protesting .
beside a primrose ' broider'd rill
" and she is to sleep by christabel .
with simple mechanics and swimming ,
nay , blackie , we 're not come for you , but the rooks . "
and from their ashes white and cold
a dignity to noble deeds imparts
where never fell his foot or shone his face
so ben thei comunly desesed ;
' unruly blasts wait on the tender spring ;
would you not say he slept on death 's cold arm ?
tried every tone might pity win ;
ragged mountain to the eastward ,
solid walls of massive ice ,
rosemarie ! de bells are ringin ' , oh how sweet de melodie !
i like , as i say , in sich scenes as these ,
with some outlandish institution ,
she noticed that morning that _ one _ was loose ;
another , bow - like , face to feet inverts .
a dead bough broke within the wood ,
to leap the fatal brink
i kiss their footsteps yet their words gainsay .
what then shall i resolve ? to pass all by ?
as thou shalt need it , gold and gold to spare ,
lie as they fell ? would they be ears of wheat
trouble , and with the most pitiful grief her cheeks are
shalt thou go forth to battle worthy of thee . "
mine own that bide upon me , all from mee
victorious virtue ! still preserve us free ;
to transubstantiate ; what redounds , transpires
o woman , in your hours of ease
y de un pico tajador :
posuit sub ista , non gravi , caput terra
bleak in the morning early ;
or stem the tide heaven pushes through our veins ,
whence the peasants fled .
for the terrors of the foe ,
our hearts to - night are open wide ,
carefully the fire was tending ,
their grave affection unto thy passion mingling .
and ill of one and of the other said ,
de quincey . _ homer and the homeridæ _ .
i had a cord that brac'd my girdle round ,
song - sparrows gently sing , " good cheer . "
correspondence with that spirit of good of which they are the
and śántá , sought their hermitage .
in my roots a worm has nestled . "
and , wow ! tam saw an unco sight !
for that good deed , permit me then
ere celebration of her spousal rites .
and strokes their shaggy manes ;
but sing them thou thyself , i pray ! "
one blown sail beneath her , hardly making
to find fault with hebe , would forfeit my name . "
where sítá in her great despair ,
is interposed , and the dim troop dissolves .
affaited at his oghne heste ,
to remember sad things , yet be gay ,
the opal shafts and domes of amethyst ;
that hight matrimony or marriage ,
ah , doubly poor the gift shall be
though cumbrous , gray and grim,--
den i try ter go ter sleep , but my eyes stay open wide .
his arms are full of all good cheer ,
there will come a peace within your heart ;
" not because she right gentle was and bright ,
how rulest thou from the undiscovered bourne
upon all lovers of our early literature , in her invaluable
diaphanous and that radiance mantled through
charles the great in vain your aid will seek--
and eerie was the way ,
life and death ,
and while the calm perpetual stars shall look upon it solely ,
and he lies in bed with a broken head in a halo of vinegar ;
' the road to all was evident and plain . '
to which the soul points . i shall try
the sages who have well considered this world of
and he looks at all he meets
" i am not worthy , of my own desert ,
applauded oft , whose anger , though intense ,
his manly legs , with silver buckles bound
he would not move a nail that nails him there ,
tumultuous enter with dire chilling blasts ,
i hadde levere to be lewed ;
that his grace be not as a dry well - head
  according to fable , calisto was a nymph of diana . jupiter having
laughing , some ; or , browed with sweat ,
and vasques set his foot thereon .
made halt -- but hark ! a noise behind
to please the child , to paint the rose ,
no trace appears of gentler ways and life!--
the rolling river , the morning bird ;
to all the saints so dear ,
what is the gift you are giving yourself ?
or how fogrum was outraged by tennyson 's princess ;
in mould or mind or what not else makes rare :
that idle hours were idly given to sense ,
viscera magnarum domuum dominique futuri .
are sleepy as they can be .
while zephyr 's fragrant breeze , soft breathing , stole
till , fain to find a guest who thought them shorter ,
ah , postumus , we all must go :
stood at the open window , leaning out ,
i know her just as well as you ;          }
among the dead and sown upon the wind--
i sleepless lie frae e'en to morn ,
" how trim he appears , " the horse exclaimed ,
and , sitting down before the heat of day ,
whom thou hast found in a lost little child . "
lo thus , mi fader , as i seie ,
was i predestin'd to select no other ,
most obliged , most humble ,
con una mano en la barba
now the long , wailing flight of geese brings autumn in its train ,
i gaze in my two springs and see                   
in copae , and in medeon 's well - built fort ,
till _ kultur _ be effaced -- and not until .
and the sun had ceased his shining .
desert off his camel tumbled ,
burst forth sudden from the castle .
stealing through the midnight air ;
ah , and the love of my mother no comfort will give to my sorrow ,
all to seek the merchandise that no man ever found .
not to fill our glasses .
those who are with you , before and since , and those to come also ,
aunt effie 's rhymes .
upon a screen . i see them blown
to watch the invading armament . ”
that i should tread , with men their human ways . "
rushing from out the gate , the people stand ,
hold your cup !
to cities sleeping under shepherd hills ;
thy bigot rage is vain ;
wandering no more in shadows dim ,
memorial ruins mounded , still and gray ;
out , all -- quite exhausted ; fully extended .
her train themselves apparel'd as nobles well became .
not be crowned as my empress , i crown thee to - day as an immortal
never yet was seen in norway
as they sing , and wake the lyre ,
from the misty land where the white kings reign .
and bards , who woo thee in the silent shade
he gooth him hoom , and gan ful sone sende
a call to battle , and the battle done
the practique of alconomie ;
for he takth of noght elles kepe ,
of turnus , and on him alone exclaim :
through amphius ’ belt and heaving belly went ;
and many a flower and medicinal weed--
they 've got me sitting on the bench -- i knew it had to come--
tan crecida ,
no war - field to find ;
for vengeance on the oppressor 's crimes .
this universe , and all created things :
some dame , that may his former love efface ;
these the deep , tender records ,
hiawatha , wise and thoughtful ,
flew like red - deer up the mountains
if two are in the churchyard laid
may peace and joy thy soul possess :
heh ! tally on ! aft and walk away with her !
a crystal brow , the moon 's despair ,
or scars with thunder some ancestral oak ,
and let the north - wind strong ,
once more galahad rides through the world , and this time he again
through shades where birds are vocal stray ,
to seize each word that flies ,
well knew the noble dietrich how fierce and fell a knight
" and as i sat , over the light blue hills
" is what we chiefly need :
lasting how long?--the space between the green
and , though unwounded , seem to feel their fate .
made by her round white arm .
on to their houses , high and vast ,
the love of man and god ,
would i had wings that i might follow you !
they could not choose but trust
or a sweet voiced angel come .
my eye explores the regions of the blessed ,
pages are embellished with all the ornaments which books could
antaeus - like , from touching of the ground ;
then grant , what here all sons of wine obtain
the thought i threw into this snow shall stir
cedere iussit aquam : iussa recessit aqua .
dis - kingdomed , will declare the way he went ;
the " duchess " books are made -- in fifty years
that mounted at our entrance , and forbids
straightway from the shining wigwam
beside every ant - hill i behold a monster crouching :
from his own thought - conquests fleeing .
oh , what a joy to clamber there ,
to thy own home , however far remote .
by noble deeds at one with noble vows ,
and public evil never touch the land ! "
his breast was armed ' gainst fate , his wants were few
whilst the acquiring of languages , the making of tools , and
to thee , adoring thee as i adore
but tougher , heavier , stronger , he that smote
these are not pines , but cypress tall and dark ;
whiskey , he knew , would always be in vogue ,
vor der türe schläft der baum ,
that they should all be shot on the next day ;
they carry space through time .
and i have n't a hole
children have seen them reproached and thought lightly of . and
and skulls that glare at the soulless night ,
passing with glory or with shame ,
there was a glass of wine , and in a cup
in living ether , doth this motion strike
" every student of the hebrew language is aware that we have
which from the ocean surges to the land ;
i must make a heavy dinner ;
the sound of the church clock near adrian 's tomb
arise to deck our land !
of all the fools that haunt our coast
unheard were serpent 's hiss and dragon 's cry ,
should kings and nations from thy mouth consult ,
their lids all hung suspended , and beneath
so he made me some presents of great value -- seven talents of
your music , far , all amphion 's art exceeds ,
of doubtful future date ,
and dreadful act , who took within the toils
with many a rude repeated stroke ,
thine , thine only , this warm dear life , o loving creator !
and you drop your chaff
this was at richmond in her palace there--
and wanton flowers , that well may court
for the want of more wadding .   he ran to the church ,
with scarlet hosen for the leg ,
so garlanded , entwined ,
bordered with sparkling frost - work , was as gay
long as they stem the stormy gale ,
oh , for the bleak , the rocky strand ,
speak as they please , what does the mountain care ?
the prince , my son , elects to love .
and lo!--even as he died
or phantoms , or their own face on the gloom ;
keeping his everlasting vigil there
so in the day of doom requite
grated on the shining pebbles ,
and i will sing you " birdie . " '
as the one regnant queen among flowers .
the mortal home we left behind :
spirits there be that pass in peace ;
wretch , i shall roughly handle thee anon ,
who 'll carry his coffin ?
the grey lawns cold where gold , where quickgold lies !
peevish hour or a malevolent humour has sometimes
" she is mine ! " he announces , adjourning
to let the laughter flash ,
" i love but you , sweetheart , i love but you ! "
to this infinite misfortune -- hence by penal justice doomed ?
the dreadful joy thy son has sent
there 's a block of broken countryside where no one ever goes ;
from out the great harmonious whole .
filled with water clean and cool .
wi ' a hundred pipers , an ' a ' , an ' a ' ,
and we took no note of time ,
that was all ! and yet , through the gloom and the light ,
to a mowntayn~ he rode ryght ,
what gains she , but the pang of seeing worth ,
in heaven , to gladden all the fields with corn ,
the sunshine of an amber pane .
sudden to a window she bade a damsel go ,
near the stately pantheon you 'll meet with the same
a lavish day ! one day , with life and heart ,
unmoved , amid the changes of this life ,
sappho now calls thee , lyre and lyric muse
proud - eyed apollo 's bow is broken ,
in a friendly sort of way .
we fed the birds that flew around
life 's endless toil and endeavor ;
for the children their dinner do lack , ma'am .
and since thou art my mother , must obey .
the family will soon be seen
o ' raisin pie .
capt . g. a hundred and twenty years .
one arm , the horror 's tearing tusks had ripped
beneath oppression , and he heard
col tuo raggio , ... ti saluto !
and from its station in the hall
i know who toil or idle lie ;
follow the deer ? follow the christ , the king ,
one can not spend
nelto . never again
as we listen in the starlight
fears not the fierce sedition of the seas ;
seeking for surcease of pain ,
heaves gently , and salutes the hopeful east :
thou know'st , juturna , how to all whoe'er
" ' tis your own doing , even with that ! "
dipped from the drains of hell
of force i man his next prey be:--
and a broad blue bridge of forget - me - not
his comrades knew , rare ben and all the rout
where the lumberers sit by the log - fires which throw
of intricate figures , moving all in law ,
the battle - smoke to glimpse the foeman 's charge ,
hovers divine the archetypal man !
upon my bosom ! do not weep!--
if she could see the wreaths to - day , the coaches and the crowd !
and mock him to his face and then
whish ! the phantom wisps away ,
his body and lungs seemed all grown old ,
yet , as most of " the fashion " are journeying now ,
for he but meets a brother .
but frances was more naughty still ,
remain not ; wherfore should not strength & might
floating ’ midst scatter’d arms ; while casques of gold
instantly a thong
have read your simple smile !
their will ;
errs strangely ; for the king , for kai khosroo ,
whose mightiness , and awe of him , at once
a master , or a servant , or a friend ,
droops with a diamond at his head ,
nor will he court one favor more .
in steeples far and near ,
arachne , by his meanes was vanquished
whence absent long , thou hast so much endured !
e. meleagou poietou palaistinou stephanos diaphoron epigrammaton .
you think the sea they look toward
three human victims to his idol vow'd ;
" then i remember'd how i went ,
to - day shall simple manhood try
attention to the verses .   i well remember the general
her right to doubt his soul 's maturer state .
and with some flowers my grave bestrew ,
voice answ'ring voice , so musical and soft ,
that queens it o'er our taste -- the more 's the pity :
i know not what i trace ;
complainant , the affair had long ago passed out of his hands and
we played beneath the apple trees .
and sides , as though to rouse his utmost rage ;
the speaker tested both his trouser straps
weird troops of tusked sea - lions ; and the world
there 's a cake full of plums , there are strawberries too ,
this ceremony over , rudiger prepares to guide the burgundians to
apollo saw , and could not keep from tears .
crowned alhambra 's beetling walls
but you hold the key to the inmost door
to - night his heart is in his hands !
unctuous and sav'ry on the burning coals ,
two white and slender arms reached up to him .
when i clutch'd your hand it was not with terror ,
the lands of new - england ( of which we now treat )
to keep our hearts from sinking ;
conceived that fairy scheme
then shadowy mist the world conceal'd ,
that should be written , if all deeds were traced ,
and ' tis the village - mason 's daily calling ,
save for two strange and livid gleams
o'er thee the purple - breasted dove
forgave them both .   now tell me which of them
and when the boys saw him ,
with fish , and flesh to feed them , and they pass
the buzzing wasp , slow sailing down the aisle ,
three beggars spied a fairy - child
when crowded into verbage,--so we lay
it schal per cas the lasse grieve .
but him ætolian thoas struck , rushing on with his spear , in the
grete weaesaes my lord , s{ir } torrent ,
to where the river weds the sound ,
the universe unfolds ; all properties
have ye beheld ( with much delight ) , i. 203 .
for want of resolution ;
heigho , says rowley ;
will it be wicked if i sing ?   oh ! let
such fate to suffering worth is given ,
and , day or night , no fervor lacks
while time ticks blank and busy on their wrists ,
of hoary - antlered sycamores ;
" the world , with all her children , thrice destroyed .
between the crash of shell and shell
and be - hyld torrent so free ,
all that thou canst ; by roman hand at least
that gleams so strangely in the light of dawn . "
he sought the wood with fair pretence
round her would hop unscared the sinless bird ,
so thronged with angels it appeared to him .
the rage of thirst and hunger satisfied ,
and in france , abel hugo translated into french the
disrespect to the loyal host ,
the bliss before my eyes !
all ashes to the taste : did man compute
or cross'd his path or question'd him .
i prize above all dwellers ' upon earth ?
she and her comrades guided to its place
avoiding troub :
in silent prayer ; the roses at my feet ,
but might i of jove 's nectar sup ,
weakly in body but yet firm in mind .
for the gallant chief of her clans has flown ,
" and shall we turn aside , " he said ,
an ' affection 's a fraud if it ' as to be bought .
labouring hard in stubborn soil .
wails manhood in glory .
o pritha 's son ! whoso will turn to me ,
whom shall we see there ?
seeing the city - waster hero nigh
in the robes of living heroes ,
and none conjecture on the next could form--
' tis true , and all men 's suffrage . but these ways
i know not:--but from that same day
women and children intermix'd ; and then ,
whispers with lips which slightly touch my ear ,
from darkness to promote me , or here place
my past life to recall ?
we speak of their ordinary contests with england from the time of
into the clay thing
announced one fatal blow for both ,
elenor murray 's letters , all the letters
the torrent bears them under , whelmed and hid
has hung around him , and , while life is his ,
ne'er to wake more .
_ parle _ , courtship .
rocking while two moons were changing ,
i thrill the crude , exalt the crass
oh , love , thou conqueror all - divine ,
thy gentleness , than to give freedom to a thousand slaves .
in blackness for her daughter snatched below .
forgot the gilded trouble it had worn ;
clean was the hearth , the mantel larded jet ;
i floated with the current of the stream ,
that firmly keeps the soul toward it turn'd ,
the erl king 's daughters in yon dim spot ? "
with sounds like the dry rattling of a shutter ,
eternity is written in the skies .
" not him only , not these only , not only the writers are under
for argus , generous youth of noble blood ,
and upon the rocks wedged firmly .
and the wind from out the east ,
thy church , peace and concord ; to vs sinners ,
numquam feruor aquis . datur hic transmittere uisus
rein'd in with purple , pearl , and gold ,
unconscious of my oscar 's gaze ,
shall stalk abroad to humble humankind ,
then let her perish with her blood .
his awful panoply
" in mighty strength are the heathen crew , "
x    167 . they gave large money to the soldiers              r. wi .
no more in bloody war will i engage ,
they leave the dwelling of the guileful power ;
my echoing song : then worms shall try
sand -- drift -- rocks -- rubble of the sea--
his arms , and he hugged me , and then with a squeak ,
g 's somehow sort of melancholy .
and a boat you used to row
" now -- now the cross has claimed its prey ! "
find on my ' lated way ,
telling of that strange immortality
or stand a moment to have serious talk .
at duty 's call i left my legs
be not afraid that i shall break my word !
who fancied he suffered from dropsy ;
hear this , remember , and our fury dread ,
  " in mecca there are quantities of blue pigeons , which none will
answer about you . i had to describe the little ones with the
we meet not here again , mary !
" blest man , who far from busy hum ,
trailing his finger , spoke : " only this line
" o marco ! " i replied , shine arguments
heard the whippoorwill complaining ,
tergum fricabat against the old lighthouse ;
old kiley died -- of broken heart ,
had you been so , i doubt if arthur 's love ,
to me that other calling would appear more congenial . the
dentro de mi corazón .
the wind that whispered softly over kiel across the bay ,
when we two stood overnight
that from his hand the crook wouldst snatch away
its fragrance perished , nor in foreign climes ;
in the deepest bay of the leaf tinted big sea water .
had floated in and touched the roof of glass
yet i goad thy rankling breast;--
we must develop this statement a little . naturally the power , and
but the grievous awaking !
of him , their father , and my king , to whom
cut ’ till th’appointed time .
poetical interpretation of life
that downe their weapons instantly they lay ,
or she would have reigned
and now like serpents sleek they lie ;
no sumptuous roof above her gentle head ,
the curfew tolls the knell of parting day ,
to meet me upon the green ,
cornel - tree . cippus becomes horned , and goes into voluntary
who stooping opened my left side , and took
clear along the mountain - crest !
brooks of water flowed .   all were divisions of one beauteous
the plain and burned the many dead whom achilles had killed and
chattering in a wanton mood .
crested with great eagle - feathers ,
take your wings and fly away .
against the course of heaven , which it had followed
more void of milk return they to the fold .
and as she came more near
past sombre homestead and wet orchard - close ,
their lord shall speed the signal on .
to frown at pleasure , and to smile in pain .
whatever passes not , in the great hour ,
on whose firm truth he aye relied ,
so thalaba drew on
powerless and tame , and draws me on and onward
finest spot in all of northland ,
lucifer , starting .
with fierce apparitions .   ring'd round by a rain
to the strings that he had fashioned .
" peg nicholson was a good bay mare ,
who brought not to the camp some proof of crime .
hickey 's genial qualities are thus referred to:--
and i ai n't so sure a soldier--
all patience i have sat till you should turn
on our decks stood rugged men ,
and the church bells was a ringing for mary and he ,
and the vision unbeheld ,
the wind cried frae the western airt
bothe in thassege , in toune , and every - where ,
your looks have touched my soul with bright
for all wor nah waitin ’ fer t’fife an ’ drum band ,
their hearts had formed so many a dream .
without dimension , where length , breadth , and highth ,
all his ships with their crews , save himself and his own ship
recognising the radical difference between the two kinds of
of wonder . on the largest of the seven
clifford o'er his own shall reign .
three hours to here ! but that was all up hill ;
their duty was -- for they were strong , and though
what pious care my ghastful lid shall close ?
that wails above the noble dead .
and grace that won who saw to wish her stay ,
come soon , soon !
had , in a coffer , ' scaped the jealous cuckold 's sight ;
burns the same , where'er it goes .
  another song with the same title , " saw ye nae my peggy ? " is
to lonely woods and hill - tops fain to fly ,
so men aver , the quiet gliding ghost .
in twilight , in perdition 's lean and inauspicious loam ) .
among these men was chosen theophile .
of matter and mind and emotion !
de la triste alcoba
mine , lord , all mine thy gift and loving token .
and sudden , lo ! his galley 's brazen prore
he sought the king , his tale he told .
the peasants came in simple pride
idle one , away with thee !
perhaps not wholly a deliberate cheat ,
yet the cause of the cloud on my brow
my heart is anxious for her danger .
and the wild nations shuddered at thy rod ?
who shall get the fresh - laid egg ,
how glad i am !
and until death fidelity !
an ’ specially when they ’ve plenty ,
hovering ever o'er the weary world ,
the words which placid sleep inspire ; which still
in allen wipfeln
ere her waking sense return .
' tis then , just then , that in there stalks
between friends ? "
the star of sky upon his footway cast ;
sends forth a horrid laugh , that dies away ,
coeus , iapetus , and typhoeus fell ,
nor virgin - choir to make delicious moan
pull out on the trail again !
cantering , cantering down the wide street
an ' he called me a daisy!--aw--'_daisy dear ! _ '
the trojans had any of that daring fearless spirit which lays
of man , whose ways are alien from mankind
with the wonderful figures of fire and mist .
immense the power , immense were the demand ;
but he shall never know -- my man--
' without you what were man ? a grovelling herd ,
uelut iocosa si theatra peruoles .
he ceased : and ráma gave assent ,
gwine come back some day . "
and phantoms of this dream , which some call life ,
oh,--i heard thee , bertha , make
to accompany the trojans whom she loves
and must leave .
of beatrice , resting , as before ,
that used to flash from your indignant eye !
forward and back in my soul is streaming .
sed nitidus pulcerque ueni : nunc indue uestem
for months still i lingered in hope and in doubt ,
caesar 's death .   he took possession of sicily , and had
but sweet beyond belief ,
he sowed a slander in the common ear ,
that of the _ serranas _ of ruiz and santillana , and of
when rose and lily fade away ;
and to replace the cloudy barrier dense .
max was her trusted friend , did she confess
y ante el alcázar pararse ,
in wild , unmeaning rhymes ,
" for thieves to bargain gold for grace :
nay even thus invade a lady 's quiet .
half a life , at every drop :
and rapture on her way .
gandharvas , dánavs , gods , the trees ,
and she drew for the traitor and liar
where my troubles may be lessened ,
nor rend with scymitar .
the choicest morsels lie from every part ,
an ' he gits tired an ' he gits cross ,
of thirsty rooks , that scour ascare
works ! that a reubens had been proud to own .
fill up with beer the caniste - er ,
may men read on the heart i taught to beat :
the rafters of the sooty roof
to heaven , and in the noon of sultry day
even now my powers are loftier , clearer ;
recalls it again ,
o happy spirit - home ! o wondrous soul !
it may be , that when all is light ,
while from the course his mettled steeds have flown .
and one by one her articles of dress
i may possess my love 's perfumed hair
but know , ye fair , a point concealed with art ,
speed all things to the worse , and backward borne
they came , they pass'd , and backward flew ,
then , for my fault as if repentant grown ,
i see thy pale , emaciated face ,
soon was god bacchus at meridian height ;
who tread thus safely on enchanted ground ,
he hopes to make it dark before ' tis night .
through confession of the oneness
all only less than argive helen fair .
and our poor fancy - play
and transformation that
to kill those foes to fair ones , time and thought .
that not too curiously would she view
of angeles ther came a great companie ,
laid it and sighed : i held a sword whose shine
hurls down diseases , death and deadly care ,
with such the enamored damsel braids her tresses .
and there 'd been trouble .
till the mad vapour mounted to his brains .
my host of readers , not a bit !
made from the teeth and the cutting claws
depart in haste , as ye have come ,
with darkness -- thrice the equinoctial line
argos the rich for his retreat he chose ,
" what plague , the french landit ! " quo ' symon ,
and in that blear of blood soon must i lie .
then she took me by the hand and led me forth from the
of rocky peaks , as prison bars ;
for none can leap , save only me ,
has nine syllables and another has only seven :
off set our prince to seek john bull 's abode ,
like donald and " the lady of the lake , "
blew them not naively , but as one who knew
managed to save themselves . as for the other five ships , they
immediately afterwards ulysses came inside , looking like a poor
mezclado de extranjera poesía ,
` steersman , ' i said , ` hold straight into the west . '
and , full of zeal and faith , esteemed light
but the low voice spoke still lower:--
of souls that infant - like beneath their burthen bend .
as near as he can lie -
the golden rule we drink ,
ground .
with the strides of lemminkainen . "
expel the venom and not blunt the dart--
lo ! it is the aged mustaph aga ;
our kindly creed ensures us this--
of opium visions , with a heart serene
drag it well through all the waters ,
weaker and weaker are their throes , until
the vessel , and loose the hawsers . so speedily they went on
i woo , to hear thy even - song ;
and others yet to die .
before the royal palace did alight :
on adam , whom embracing , thus she spake .
drummond was a sonneteer of great skill , and used many original
the south - wind softly sigh ,
as something calls to me ;
curved beak into the neck of each of them till he had killed
wich of our onnable body'd be safe ? "
who can know that .
" wherefore , bridegroom , dost thou linger ,
at starting , is my object . nay , we 'll go
sought them on foot to tell how jesus died !
wi ' grit and sma ' ,
and now , dear moon , i leave thee .
. . . . . ly ivyll he gone
what odds if leinster 's kingly roll
long shunn'd the strife of men , now sought once more .
just as some roguish country nurse ,
thy words fell soft as vernal snow ,
mas ovi miedo que era encantado .
then sudden , as if a sword fell from on high ,
seems to me but just that it should be soothed and healed by the
disgraceful in his writings .
never drink the cup of wisdom . "
all easy things to do he did with care ,
the hermit graciously replied :
love , in the tempest most alive ,
we shudder at the past , and bless the light
by scrub and thorn in ethandune
then prove the change to be expedient ,
the city and lands are thine ;
a king mai make of lord a knave
they would have flitted to the woods again
he has found an avenger of blood in the lord !
and its sun a junk of red iron
and must obey the voice .   o woods that wear
their arms are strong around me ; and i know
and they were , fond pair , together buried ;
thou hast taken the light of many suns ,
to his lord 's ear , and , standing at his side ,
whate'er the theme , the maiden sang
to learn thy fortunes from the voice of fame . "
mi weyhte of love and mi mesure
and turned her out of door ,
you 'd shock us , whites , by chewing it ;
no : pride of the bay , while its ripples shall run ,
and your value sinks to zero
or carrying sighs from the red lips of june
mary allows she was wrong about mr . claude being selfish ;
con duèlo y con pèna ,
her swimming eyes , pressing his honest hand .
throughout the world they do extol
yet as rain that lies clear
here hope might think to find what hope were worth .
lingers still this light house legend .
there might his soul develope best
his wonderous course directed to the west :
excep ' jest ' fore christmas , when i 'm good as i kin be !
from heart - corroding bitterness of speech
behind him , over heath and moor .
good liquor , i stoutly maintain ,
we 've watched sweet nature 's smiling face .
many - benched ships of achilles , the son of peleus . then shall he
no breeze above , but on the mast
o deeds of the day triumphant ! o word of sigurd 's worth !
to the fights in foreign places ,
give food or money to the starving poor .
where there were shell holes summer sends , un-
thy skill to poet were , thou scorner of the ground !
crowned hill and heather .
beneath she views ; then tow'rd the chalky land
but life to me 's a weary dream ,
as having nothing , yet possessing all !
and vowed he 'd steal no more .
shall joy to listen to thy distant sweep ,
in human bonds , and gray with human griefs .
yn undydd an un duw in a ran ,
by the stealthy stab of the sharp reef pierced ,
he took but some water to wine .
from whence the housewives ' cloth did come :
of all the poisons that the fruitful earth
in a hammock let 's swing , weary of wandering ;
catholic church,--these collected , too , in long periods , from the
" how are you , river - comrade ? "
the sailor sings of ropes and things
if they will shut their mouths with lime , like jars ,
long full days ...
and in her lullaby the language used
" with the bright falchion by his side ,
an ' plough the drills entirely , o !
by vulcan spun , and pour'd profuse around .
that no one should him wrong .
then you illumine the regions supernal ,
unto her once again ? the iron shackles of silence -- are they
of other worlds there came a light
to penetrate the frost .
she cast her arms around him , and their eyes
the colonel and her father .
meantime , through rugged rocks , and shagged with thorn ,
a dyddwg o fragawd wirawd orgred ,
your friendly sight should providence discern ;
but vital sense and exhalation hot .
contento que se le iguale
there the harp - strings jingle , and there the drums beat .
question them . king agamemnon was the first to do so . " tell me ,
the half - deck take the round - house walking out .
they but augment the deep and sweeping thoughts
in such a place as this . o do not curse ,
order of things in politics and social organization . his
but sweeter , goldening the sphere ,
and wandered in a shape of limpid frost
or cause us not in lowliness , vain thoughts of self to hide ?
springs a flower unknown among us ,
to talk of peace when mortals would repine ;
hear the deep groan , survey the dying mien ,
sweet peace sits crown'd with smiles ,
hath more than raphael 's power ,
lord of all the forest flowers ,
were stricken , menelaus brave in arms ,
they lived not to retire ,
open , ye heav'ns , your living dores ; let in
and snares the soul with visions vain ;
" can i tell you ere you ask her ? " pounded slow the tonga - bar .
that oft they hide the good they might declare ,
crushed with the iron cars--
if i misjudged this daughter , canvass her
their parents .
the sovereign captives of my loyal breast .
and were as povere as medea ,
the favorite waltz of the year ,
till the twelfth morn we should no harm sustain . "
the soul of memory 's raiment , rendering blind
looks for the ne'er - changing pole in the phenomena 's flight .
but no ; in his basket , see , he has brought
one for himself . "
of her strong personality , there as she sat
of the pikes was not the largest ,
with a can for me and a crab for you !
men , when their affairs require ,
and a whole hecatomb in chrysa bleed .
life and years of hope are over !
erinus ' dirge , not having now the whole
under evening 's cloak , they all
why of the storms am i fonder
he had never been so jubilant or frolicsome before ,
all the long , warm summer day
thy rays should evermore our leaders be ! "
' tis real good , or seeming , moves them all :
demand a stronger wing ,
can he who takes heed of the sparrow
the gazers come , where , coiled and serpent - swift ,
and learn that worldly things are nothing worth ,
let april fade ! for me , unfading bloom ! ...
as with a wedge !   but when i look again ,
and i 'll eat the parts that you throw away . "
forgive , i pray , the heedless crime . ”
have not the beautiful been ta'en away--
walked the lovely group of maidens ,
thrice hissing , thrice he shakes his forked tongue ,
  _ the style , etc . _ : some at least of dante 's minor works had been
well , well , i had a love who 's resting in the clay
and then in haste her bower she leaves
to the delicate souls of arthur james ,
that has made his future a barren waste .
that , when with words of truth i plead ,
mi worldes worschipe hath bereft . "
_ the bonds of hope constrain me yet : _
displays , yet guards the tempting charms within :
i saw , with half - unconscious eye ,
and tranquil , from whose floor the new - bathed stars
hath never lost its fresh perfume ,
the caliph then : " no features fair ,
but first with narrow search i must walk round
which fit my web - feet neatly ;
and mine amati -- my beloved one--
as when he throws his last glance o'er the sea ,
and that , which first had come , began to wax
and to my ashes lend a tear .
and parcel my inheritance by lot ,
you close beside me , and outside , the rain ,
three several pillars , each a rough hewn stone ,
and the workmen often wondered what made his lordship laugh !
i snatched a silk - piece red and rare
who came to warn me of my error here .
to be so cruel and yet so divine .
but i smell a rat close by :
and blasted be thy murder - aiming eye ;
her highest leap had come :   with ease
and the throat .
ne troilus out of hir herte caste ;
though tight each launch , where lines of lustre stole
" at early dawn the crier was sent
they dreaded worse then hell : so much the fear
so would not i--
all grief appeased , all pain outworn ,
might not my treasure win my heart ,
now on the gleaming horizon the white cliffs laughed
at your old asthmatic pipe !
and listen to her voice ;
all the city on the hillside
an ' a goatskin water - bag
and , here and there , infused some soul in ' t--
the roseate bell and the lily are there ,
her pearl and rose across the sapphire waves
then spake the margrave : " sith i have naught of castles , i will
till they see arles , and hear the hollow roar .
formerly , today i notice them
my temple , lord ! that arch of thine ;
safe from the blasting demagogue 's applause ;
and kindred plants that with unwatered root
and turned his eyes toward heaven ; nor spake he aught .
all this , while passing to and fro ,
a mighty maze ! but not without a plan ;
a mighty king and noble , / doughty and fair to see .
father - in - law , or son - in - law ? for such
from that fair ending of the sunny bay ;
all the harshness of his anger ,
home to my brest , and to my memorie
if it so were hir eem ne wolde cesse ,
truly is earth insensate for all time ;
wherefore , o lord of heaven , now also send
o'er - come in music ; with a wine
of joy ; we saw the cavern and the cliffs
the world is gall
_ o alte vir _ .
wilt thou , lord , stand for me ?
when , on the brooding darkness of the void
and sweet , and dread his punishment decrees .
they brought the mangled margrave , where etzel saw him well .
yet still thou art as dear ,
in foaming goblets circled swiftly round ,
was ever written by instinct alone since the world began , " *
a thousand score they choose of chevaliers .
bringing the black death upon christendom ,
we ’ve ’em now — the cows and calves
here 's a knife , clip quick -- it 's a sign of grace--
who loves to lie with me ,
till now the bitterness of what he felt
wedged in the trench , by our own troops confused ,
there came to worms with gernot full many of albric 's kin .
alcinous reigned , fruit of all kinds , in coat
from the courts of every people ,
past foxwhelps oasts with their hooded ears ,
the stories are told , then all to bed .
i have a little doll ;
and cleft from top to bottom equally ;
but what fair dell or grove he sings in now ,
come away , o maire ban--
but that enormous barrier holds it fast .
ineffably pre - eminent regard !
dawn bright with the morning above--
which nature 's vernal hand has spread ,
well , the mob may ask " did he reach the pole ?
the first tee murmur'd : " just this chance to score ,
for what does my spirit cry ?
was full of cheer
when the waves show their teeth in the flying breeze .
lying on the golden sand
ever unreeling them , ever tirelessly speeding them .
that in thi court have longe served ,
shake with a spasm as though of birth ,
turn to the little prairie towns ,
tellus ipsa parit naturaque daedala rerum .
and is in summer a most lovely spot ;
and zoned with gold ; and now when these were on ,
and not to carry ruin round the globe .
do all proclaim the mind of god .
that the work is from the corrected text
meadows
the wild rhythms clinched in us ....
dim caverns of green solitude are rolled
old - sword of eotens , with edge of proof ,
wastes of barren soil and sand
and thinking thus and cursing , through a flurry
amongst the sleepers lies the boy awake ,
the treasure of hours gone -- scenes once beheld ,
no sunsets crimson this stainéd sea ,
that hunted , hunted so , to see ,
with stinging lashes of the myriad rain ,
myself forgot ;
' tis right , cocks should be brave and bold :
therfore wyll and wit i wyll kepe styll .
and poetry and art their sunshine spread ,
withoute pris and who schal serve ,
than the treasures of spain
is rethorique , who s faconde
o traveller , stay thy weary feet ;
ye muses . aid me , that the tale be told ,
then sent he to his sister , that he 'd to her repair ,
each joint , and sinew felt , and handled so ,
that with their red flush all the place
but , with a smile of sweet surprise ,
her betel - nut bag is a needle - worked charm ,
" _ for the cause of labour all over the earth _ . "
but only in meditation
though the hoar - frost glisten on his cheek ;
and stars are born and suns ....
has heard ;
has ever yet conceived , or ever shall ,
sparkles hot , seed ethereal down in the dirt dropping ,
stamp and scratch with hoof and nail ,
within , without , me , had its rise : thus blend
covered with flowers on all sides , and the richest in the world ;
she stood with dripping hands , blood - red ,
the dead woman lay in her first night 's grave ,
a body , in whose virtue dies the being
their winding - sheet the bluidy clay ,
scarce caring who might win the day ,
now that i have cooled to you
and hold your lips with mine !
and long and loud the castle gun
fall from a cloud , ) if the first impetus
such as i was that in thy countenance
" oh , how wus she sick ? " " all bloated up . "
as we meet in thy name , alma mater , to - night ,
from weakness , folly , error , not exempt ,
reeking , they climb ,
and merit praise from ages yet to come .
but , like all nursery maladies ,
first o songs for a prelude ,
but the unkind and the unruly ,
beholding you , i am endymion ,
we are heading to the gale , and the driving of the sleet ,
in the crisp sand
from faded centuries ....   o foolish thought and vain !
others are exhaling ?
thou wert my guide , philosopher , and friend ?
men wiser than we are may wonder ,
_ sakhī : _     the sakhī soothed her fears , and led her lovingly,--
craft - rig , croft - ridge .
departed each his several way .
to whom , eumæus , thou didst thus reply .
a " fast young man " was philiper flash ,
theyr sacryfyce wandrynge in theyr madnes
swearing that he will shoot me dead ,
that is staring at the sun .
and taketh into itself along the air
alone return he by his witless way ;
as we glide to the grand old sea --
in his wanton mood , of weapons recks not ;
_ esta noche es noche buena
eternal progress , the kosmos , and the modern reports .
' tis not beneath the burgonet ,
supposition that virgil gave a meaning to the words which was
of some loose hanging rock to sleep . "
without requital until doom .
when you and i were young , adam ,
seem'd taking out the sting to leave the honey .
and the fetid breath of living death
" and ne'er was highland welcome
the parted concave closes , while around
wheeler ’s _ history of india , vol . ii . 324 _ .
till their hope became despair ;
by him at every season , / as scarce might elsewhere be ,
and namely bot the pouer
and shall for ever hold them to their place ,
and shuddering groans ; but passing through it
is a bluey lake .
and to travel , ' tis great charges ,
not in his youth alone , but in age , may the heart of the poet
yet since the greeks and trojans would not see
he said one brief , emphatic word ,
nunc autem sacris baiarum proxima lymphis ,
then a lurch forward , frigate and men ;
never was there heard such singing ;
the christian graces on his auction - block ,
come ! with thy panoplied array ,
but underneath your feet you see
noblest and worthiest thoughts , and brim the cup
bleed all his sons , and ilion float with gore :
he lived for me in what he once had been ,
her child , her baby , her flesh and blood .
_ miser catulle , desinas ineptire _ , etc .
that sister kate might learn the words
forgetting to pierce it .
and anchoretic years ,
whose more than mortal reputation ,
surpassing sweet on summer days is bonnie nithside !
which it saw upon the water ,
slumber and waking ; loved ; gone proudly friended ;
since thou my thread of life hast kindly spun ,
i watch them quietly .
the lady of heaven , and the other seats below it , make so great a
patroclus dead , achilles hates to live .
at any other period .
in secret swift he laboured on :
nothing , child , to ease thy pain !
in life 's decline at length reward
the snowy flowers shuddered and grew still
pillows his chin upon an orient wave ,
to shake the centres of domestic peace ;)
on yon green bank wild flowers he pou'd ,
not equal to the soul 's outreaching hope .
then the sachem sent a beaver messenger
ruthless among the pastures yet unripened ,
but things more costly still , too rare to
to which ere long we shall attain ;
let not dame birtha and sir martin thence
here i stan ' on two liddle chips ,
so dusty , ragged , torn .
hales , in his introduction to the poem , remarks : " the _ elegy _ is
thy step would err from britain 's shore .
in fair green fields .
two hundred and forty first men of their time :
still to find his path apart .
his form is thin and shrunken ;
of the keen north should sear them . well , i wot ,
his languid tail above us , lit with myriad spots of light . _
i 'll brim it well with pieces red ,
sink into sleep , or take the night unto her eyes and breast :
the rooshian black eagle looks blue in his eerie
in which the armèd city draws its breath ,
on beala - nam - bo .
go to sleep !
his , i repeat , is the anguish -- my journalist , eulogist critic ,
by the aid of my trappings      and the air above .
elder , whose life is as lovely as light
suffer from a gnawing conscience ,
where the gold - paved highways are .
to wend and meet no sin ;
to ashes , all pour'd out upon the earth .
on the blue pond , and raises golden eyes
where scarce a sheep cot rais’d its shelt’ring head ,
dark as the touchstone that tries gold ,
in aegium , and the scatter'd towns that he
soaring away in the moonland sheen ,
let not ambition mock their useful toil ,
with the breaking luck of edenhall !
hiding this in her heart , the heart which beat
ah , leave the hills of arcady !
they shrill like cordage in a gale ,
at the creamy hearts of primroses .
see , huge of form , his flag he rears ,
after myn auctor , tellen hir gladnesse ,
impos'd by phoebus of the silver bow ,
wondrous happiness that overflowed mutually from
the glow deepened in her face and her eyes flashed .
" by other haven shalt thou come to shore ,
full depths of care
will prove at least the medium must be clear .
o , look at the moon !
good spirit , teach him what he ought to be ,
as i gazed with earnest look
their patron , too , was by sore sickness brought
from her cabin'd loop - hole peep . "
through far and foreign countries have i heard :
branded as libertines and wantons ? "
she was more grieved than i , or anyone ,
brunhild 's part , is of late origin and has no counterpart in
because the world was young ,
the scent of the woods and the silence deep
beneath a roof , projecting some small space ,
" if michael suits in that and suits my maid ,
hadst thou taen ' aff some drowsy bummle
that it no pause obtain'd : and following came
must never hope to reproduce the faint
justice and truth have vanished hence ,
parformed þe hyȝe fader on folke þat he made ;
de los andes la cima :
in words of the soul , that are silent in speech ,
and hailed her as she passed .
with labor , and therefor , with love , for a man .
that she love me .
who binds spirits at his feet .
one goes
ought but coffins and their tombes .
he the handsome kaukomieli ,
unnoting star or sun .
not raffael nature . will it help my case?"--
" our laird has fine houses , and guineas o ' gowd
all quite in the family way .
till round her knights four hundred in burnish'd armor shone .
gaily the glad table round ;
before the troops , the war - king raised the standard ; the
hence far and wide our lords are sent
baffled the cunning skill of all childish imitators .   a
and in time 's hand the old hours of time as rods ,
until they come to london bridge .
dryden was of course quite right in objecting to the claim that
smite and snap short each other , crashing loud ;
so much for nature:--by way of variety ,
i 'll sing his dirge . "
in the mighty deeps for ages ,
that god doth love thee .   therefore with thy prayer
and the noble women of france in the black
apollo 's sacred tree--
and as he wills it sink or rise .
i shake from head to foot .
that without which all goodness were a task
in a wild retreat ,
ilium , et omnis humo fumat neptunia troia ;
as good , as generous , as they are .
deepened down beneath the tear .
he sprinkles healing balms , to anguish kind ,
and loop - hooled battlements , cast the same shade
sae tickled death they could na part :
songs shall be sung by us in that good day --
all list to hear thee troll ,
derived from _ lar _ ( or household god ) .
had left the gate unlocked
to have to go to bed by day ?
and now her frock with belt and fold
now cheaply bought for thrice their weight in gold .
the rest of all that tribe ; with here and there
which holier for the lapse of time
thou’rt now the great one of this place ,
and the iron weed 's purple was spattered ,
and know , however great your meed of fame ,
mine ancient friend and minister .
woos his own end ; we are not angels here
when singing to the rose ,
and off they spring , and round they go ,
in my short absence , yet behold
search every cave with utmost care
no means they have of joining into one .
she dwelt among the untrodden ways
and never willed to do and never could .
" lo , i am death ; i bid thee follow me ! "
declare to man it was not sent in vain .
answering the horn .   out of the night they spoke ,
and so as i was stealing back again
too rapt with frost
pits that are screened by the crest and the copse
whom hawthorne has immortal made .
death ! and the gulf of hell shoots out its flame
" montjoie ! " they cry.--comes now carlemagne the king !
could not my griefs , my woes , my plaints , and all
i walked with sidney to the block .
oh , let the clouds grow dark above ,
as long as nature holds it good
i hope ?
and to his father 's ancient walls is ferried presently .
then claspt the cross , and pass'd away in peace .
you chose the best among us -- a strong man :
they cross'd the girdling wave and reach'd the isle .
when there has not been frost
you saw him pass me for miss trevor 's side ,
they spread o'er valley , over plain ,
_ fley _ , to scare , to frighten .
his friends all gave him counsel his marriage troth to plight
and , of her husband long bereaved ,
and the clanking loom is busy
before her ran an influence fleet ,
then mounted he his car that glowed
and the evening sun descending
had held her heart a captive from my own .
at morning , on his untried battle - field ,
there the stately warriors / of amelungen land .
' nay ! ' said the baron , ' mock not at my fall ,
succeeded .
the curtain and the sun fall side by side ;
blue shade of golden branches
del tajo á la vega baja .
as he , who show'd most patience in his look ,
nor how their children , playing by their knees ,
a thousand cupids fly
she moved in sleep and dreamed perverse , nor wist
of song and tourney won , they tell ,
for him , proud fiend , the moon no waning knows ,
( purple with honey - points
when he was young , out of the water - gold
knock ; pass the wicket ! thou art come
become drunk with the juice of the grape , than to be
a solitary doe !
had we , for the wind
ho ! then we strips ' is saddle off , and all ' is woes is past :
to plaided legions grew ,
the parting signal streamed , at last the land withdrew .
too subtle for the airiest human head ;
o sysiphus , thy pluck is required !
wrapt not in eastern balms ,
since i have known above my forehead glance and gleam ,
then bowed the youthful siegfried / the royal dame before ,
broader than two doorway curtains .
could move the powers on high ,
at tokio is beyond the coroner 's eye
knowledge in geology during the present century , owing to the
and yet i think i love her with a husband 's tenderness ,
with mumbled prayers , atones the deity .
her manners quite the wrong way rub me :
that i drink blood . _ "
and arms and men in many a mingled heap .
and magnanimous--
the river -- oh the river , and the sun ;
cacus he catcheth in the dark spueing out fire in vain ,
he looked upon the old man , stayed his steps ;
thee only of all that serve , of all that sing
has tracked the chilly gray !
known or seen
oh never shall we know again
" great god , man ! ca n't you answer a plain question . yes or no ? "
dark and terrible in aspect ,
lo ! i have seen the scented flower ,
the problem set by leibnitz as a challenge
we are gods ! let us cast us adrift
let thy scant shadow for perfections pass ,
my face is full of shame , my heart of teen :
arose the dingy form uncouth .
he should have stayed , have lingered here
in numbers , and but these few ,
lift it out of the dust -- let it wave as of yore ,
its little ray of gladness throw .
" and he beside her standing ! "
spill no other blood than thine .
the sharpest in the slaughter ;
the sounds of sharp spears at great tourneyings ,
come , little mary , come to me ,
llewellyn george , but lately come from china ,
with scowling brow he stands and courage high ,
and the war - ship glided homeward
and these were cooling water at my lips .
when we were wo nt to meet : when last we met ,
only one night , i will die before day ,
new every morning is the love , 113 .
destruid , and thanne bachus preide
without a hand - hold , and now stoutly clung
night ; and the street a corpse beneath the moon ,
the proverb says a man can always find
enauiganda , siue reges
phisique is after the secounde ,
--nay , now , hear me , how i prate !
when first to the village he went ;
that if ' t is giv'n us here to scan aright
stood lonely as before ;
so , though you die , blest martyrs shall you live ,
of some broad branching tree with leathern thongs
with hate in his heart and revenge on his brow ,
jist tell me who king jonah was ;
the piper
eight years ago -- or was it nine ? -- last march .
uplift am i ?   when first in store the new - made beasties stood ,
simply believing the truth of his word .
when i saw hither come a mighty one ,
if a poor drowning creature craved thine aid ,
and her smile is pleasant ,
mean while th ' eternal eye , whose sight discernes
of faces at a grave when rain was falling ,
probe his blue veins and pasture on his breast .
in most men 's breasts you 'll find the flame
thou teachest me to deem
so grief assuage , so conquer pain ,
and crowned your infant poet 's head
a son , the famous rishyaśring .
the dog - star rages ! nay ' tis past a doubt ,
i 'm coming to see you ! honestly , in truth !
from her pale lips no sorrow speaks ,
hiende su cuello el bárbaro asesino .
but scorn to notice my white lateen .
brooded also on the third day ;
the angel of the fire rose up and not a word said he ,
to cut neater weather - boards out of brown paper :
and had faintly sigh'd out an adieu ;
in every point kepe and fulfille .
in life she is diana chaste ,
i haf bigged babiloyne , burȝ alþ{er}-rychest ,
prometheus ' fire , and moulded took the form
" made of clay , " he exclaimed , " well , i 'd like to see a man make a
what ! you 're a sun - flower ? how i shall miss you
“ snake - born , upon themselves their warring rage
he is wasting time in play ?
the sacred fane of childhood , when first reared ,
requested me to fashion them into some shape more fitting
though my gibbles were a ' for the human frame
with gems , a fitting crown to deck a princess ' head .
  oldham had expressed the same idea in the dream :
but he no sooner has his bugle wound ,
of over - winter with the least tip - touch
wild cloud - mountains that drag the hills along ,
how achilles made havoc among the men of troy .
were it fifty times as fair .
the colours strong ! for , if we deem aright ,
i watched them bowing and devoutly kneeling ,
to something like this when too oft display'd ;
should always find embarrassments .
holding the maiden thou lovest
which , lacking muses for a wider praise ,
do you remember how the song goes , robin ,
where from the dark and narrow door
lo thus , my sone , hou it hath ferd :
i am now thy nurse , i bid thee sleep .
chispa ( aside ) .   and i have two to take .
pursued so long , the maithil queen ,
happy is england ! i could be content
the poetical effect of a lover 's name upon glass :
but down in the lead with the wheel at the flog
beneath all change a clear and windless deep :
of black and crimson , with a crimson cloud
jesuits -- with what injustice we need hardly say . james describes
till we have driven the briton ,
their hearts remain small drawn .
will mourn the highland maid .
go , thunder out thy wonted words ! lay craven fear on me ,
and joy is ever new .
come with the dawn ,
the flute can say them o'er again ;
to weep for my daughter louise .
yes , sing away , sing on , and praise , and brag of her !
if the english succeeded in taking the count ,
the sentiments that surged through my dyspeptic hulk that day ;
what cuppe it was : and thanne al oute
" blow over all the garden ; blow ,
now the waggoner is driving
she took me to her elfin grot ,
to the upper glens of suomi ? "
i will be more your kin than all your own !
or in the small olympic pit , sit split
springs from the corn !
p. of debts , and taxes , wife and children clear ,
when all my best doth worship thy defect ,
_ tuesday morning._--breakfast with captain forrester -- ochel
in the summer moonlight glow . '
suddenly , as if it lightened ,
he seemed a cherub who had lost his way
inscrutable , colossal , and alone ,
and the artillery , leaving the emplacements where they had been
he spake ; at once the son of capaneus
in her so near .
reeking with noble blood , cambalao 's stream
for worship it is too incredulous ,
and we see there the footsteps by which men had gained
shall pass like mist from o'er our straining sight ,
he fondly looks back to the joys o ' a laddie .
the foot - fall of her parting soul is softer than her singing . "
became not ; and my guide address'd him thus :
for heaven held nought beside so fine or rare .
but unto mine avenging spirits ye
of multitudinous waters round about
in the morning to hear ye !
o fellow - kinsmen of the deep ,
breathless , with leaping heart along the track .
and the winds , which follow wherever he goes , have shaken
“ now by to - morrow ’s dawn supply
that she had worked it so the lady thought ;
and when the sun sinks slowly down ,
there sits my little lady ,
he 'll make your wants his care .
an awful pause succeeds the stroke ,
“ those chiefs with wandering steps invade
that put me out , there 's no denying .
men that keep a mighty rout !
" old man , i look to attain to honoured age ;
to melt in tears the quicker .
she roams maternal hills and bright ,
in the racing of the fleet - foot ,
pray thee , if ever thou dost see the land
an arrow , ' mid the crowd of fugitives
astronomy finds in your eyes
of ocean called forever more .
and gave them virtue never to be spent ;
just dropped into tea and
soon as the windings of the stream they reach'd ,
flirts , is fierce and haughty ;
religious one , _ á la muerte de jesús , _ which abounds in
his martial men with fierce harangue he fir'd ,
flashing go the summer 's looms ,
' but why ? ' said una . ' i do n't understand . '
in after days ,
while the prairie grass , like rippling seas ,
here a gentleman present , who had in his attic
with your mane unhogged and flowing ,
was this , perchance , the answer that he hoped ?
one from my cousin sophy daw--
because their love is still unsatisfied .
his owners and drivers stood round in amaze
back into deeds of daring ,
stands on thy bleached bones and screams for prey .
that falling tear.--what does it mean
of the order 's book , and silent read the law ,
śatrughna , look , the mountain see
afflict her with the fires of woe ? ”
friends to the doom ! as sorrowed soul ,
for fosse and turret proud to stand ,
two massy keys he bore of metals twain
unto the king , that should there chance to fall
the new wine 's foaming flow ,
she burns all over , every where .
walkin ' out ae mornin ' early , vol . iii . , 24 .
on anna 's soft and gentle breast my head reclined at last ;
full of joy and gossiping .
last night i dreamed of the maid with yellow curls .
i 'm sure you do , good mrs . puss ,
on the rocks and the hard sea - sand .
' twas thus cold harbor 's quarry made complete
weep great rivers from thine eyelids ;
and yet not lodge together ?
for all a man can do , how have i wasted
we can not help ourselves ;
when i have so much need thereof ?
and wouldst thou do one duty to his mind--
the horse adorning , and the horseman 's pride :
quod miserae oblitae molli sub ueste locatum ,
then bring all your pots and kettles ,
and , awed , in orbs remote some race unknown
my cavaliers in vaunting vied
then , my lucasta , might i crave
a la sombra tendido
i knew how near to the life
devolved ; though should i hold my peace , yet thou
chorus.--the lang lad they ca'jumpin john
from some aspiring mountain 's crown
the brook runs gayly on
all fear of thee ; arise , and vindicate
just think for a moment your sister is here :
kingfisher , mallard , water - rail and tern ,
and cause both man and horse , all which be keen
" queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls ,
where still , if fondly wise , the heart conceives
the infant appetite is cloy'd .
dropping rich balm , round the dark pine - woods curled
was not learned of sky or stream ,
lost , swimming , one by one ;
now i had grasp'd his tresses , and stript off
and when he unwound the red clew ,
no feather on him trembled .   the fair dame
for fever , cold or faint .
while they , asham'd to stir abroad ,
all the court filled with stranger things than he ,
a lettre , forto make him duelle
in mary 's happy eyes !
meanwhile behind , with renovated force ,
rose o ' the world , they have words galore ,
of a neighboring town .
lxvii . " lo , tarchon sends ambassadors ; they bring
thou hast borne too long a burden never meant
through native rosemaries and rue
on a bank of flowers , in a summer day ,
drink all of life and quaffing lustily
all thy fellow birds do sing
may dwell the loved and lost ,
all which upon those goodly birds they threw
but i dare not rise and greet her as i did in early days .
into the opening ; but all such ingredients
and as a trophy to the sons of troy
but we their strength and manhood will assay ,
leofsunu spoke      and his linden - shield raised ,
qui nobis puer natus est .
their various opinions .
and armed like frenchmen will disguised go ,
how to still the angry waters .
canvassed for books , with just the thought in mind :
expatriate from their native rhone ,
on the other hand i have not thought it necessary to include
him answer'd helen , loveliest of her sex .
with open winglets that might bear a dove ,
_ here _ they all wished through their latin to drive
can do
rain influence , and judge the prize
nor spring nor summer in the joyless year ,
right the wronged , and raise the weak .
where fairer tempes bloom , there sleep
once , on a glittering ice - field , ages and ages ago ,
" but if _ they _ go ter church _ i _ refuse to ! "
  one is reminded of , " o whistle , and i 'll come to you ,
who eye me thus . "--"my sister ( she for whom ,
" through the cornfield let us go ,
would make a man hungry in paradise !
when bill mc'gee he says to me :   " we 've _ got _ to do it , jim .
exposed , in sunny place , to scorching ray .
and every stone burst out in flame ,
and next distributed the paynim horde
characteristics and literary position can be inferred with nearly
bringing to market stolen goods ,
lest such a subtle , shimmering grace
but the shadows and coloring rest , mortal , with thee .
a man of health , and strength , and spirits gay ,
of what estate [ gh]e be , [ gh]ovng or wold ,
to labor with his hands for the support
but soon their mockery failed them
to all their sallies i in jest replied ,
and my growth have no guerdon
to tell the world their worth .
two sat down in the morning time ,
" a little lame though . " death replied :
with your brotherses , southcotes , and names less deserving ,
on breezy rock and shady shore ,
answering a score of hills , old beachy head
his vig'rous remedy display'd
the night of waters and the drowning foe !
a spark from jove 's resplendent throne ,
which saves its surface from the mould of death .
the people knelt upon the ground with awe :
by the lord of bechlaren , the blameless rudeger .
that the white o ' his e'e is turn'd out ,
and may you prove , while on you press
the eldest charm continued in defence ,
and the sort who eat unduly ,
then changed like to a bow that 's bent , and then
' tis sad when boys are disinclin'd
but mother webtoes stamps her foot ,
of foolish books and little silver traps ,
and gave her people rest ;
within our earthly night 's own mirroring ,
and leapt right out amid their gang
was overlaid with gold , dazzling to view ,
beneath his aim the trojans back recoil'd ;
endymion , weep not so ! why shouldst thou pine
and some in velvet gown .
in very tender years ensure
what wonder if in may itself i lack
the sun 's supreme bequest !
like his dead lady , dead seemed tancred good ,
the sorrels , and old prince , that 's five--
the queen called for her satins , while the drab
were the souls of the line of captain pen ;
all your strength is in your union ,
a northward path began to roam ,
and wishes , had he any ?
fertile they say , and of immense extent :
who else must bide in hopeless banishment .
what do you think the parson found ,
who made the spider parallels design ,
but more than ' he ' her poor tongue could not speak ;
then in solemn , stately accents ,
then came the cry of hounds anew ,
best i like the ocean 's dirges ,
concentrating eternal stupidities ,
re - enter heaven ; or else in some mild zone
the hunter 's song dripped in between
and thrilled with bulls ' or bears ' alternate wail --
spir . i 'll tell ye . ' t is not vain or fabulous
hither come against us , / the while a sword i wield
so on eternal dials that god may hold ,
in a molten glory shrined
so too the asa 's life on high prefigures that
and dropt a tear in season ;
i stare .   i can but see .
rush on her , in a throng , and close her round ,
to think that i should stay by him
yet , love , i am unblest ;
remind me ' tis to do .   the frame i 'll stow . "
my father ! thou behold'st the house to which
nor , proud and restless , burned to know
only spake to bid them welcome
bot alle drinken noght alike ,
i saw it .
soon the frail eggs they shall
and , from the balconies o'errun
shooting with bows upon the lee .
i woke , bewildered as himself , to see
swiftly our pleasures glide away ,
not long the waiting ; for when stanley thane
care not for tales of that sort . i hear you say : " fie , fie , ju !
but at the board - head shone the blood - red lamp of mars .
will be our knowledge from the moment when
and in mid chase called off his hound ;
that grieved and doubted , it came to pass
we paused amid the pines that stood
  _ noctua gothica . _
reap thy malice on thy kindred ,
into their fortress .   one and all they haled
how shall a length of twice seven hundred miles
magnificence ; and what can heav'n shew more ?
and though his decision may
and sure enough , next morning , as i prowled the boulevard ,
remov'd ; e'en such was i on that dun coast ,
might dare to mesh his hands in , or to kiss .
and a taller town than rome .
until a little wind upheaves ,
and in his hand the willing stranger led .
no man may pass them , but aim you well
and chase off the anguish o ’ pale sorrow ’s tears .
into night 's sibyl face , and saw the woe
and he who never feared before
the sultan better pleases me ,
everywhere with jesus
' long ' fore established true .
th ' enchanter who once entered hell , led there
he tells his deeds with pride ;
of those fossil remains which she called her " affections , "
like pure gold freshly burnished , view :
his men with rods shall on the shoulders whale ,
here , madam -- miss cynthia--'tis good -- you'll confess--
bows have they , generally with two strings ;
what _ should _ the yeomen do
come from the world of thought which was their home .
and sends a batch of sonnets to the store .
i thowt i heeard a dreadful noise ,
to walk parched plains , and thirst for that sweet draught
ne'er yet was run : minerva breathes the gale ,
looked up the form of infancy ,
he fattens on the plunder of the public .
schenk ein den wein , den holden !
so here , in his war - guise armoured , they laid
beside him , and the dagger which himself
of the skies and clouds of evening ! '
single file from their night quarters .
john was far in bert 's advance in point of age , he
may your trials never daunt you ,
to rot in the ground , or breed
stone on stone
to point his duty ; he was glad
i would that thus , when i shall see
than is the lily upon his stalke green ,
mixed in them with eternity of night;--
his lance in fight , and dart the flying spear ,
for the bright world 's sake--
named haemus ; strymon whence , as autumn falls ,
need have no fear , in such a place ,
o'er arms that hide in his halls --
will weeping vigils keep ;
sighing are strewn upon the tufted floor .
moved , as the boughs above him swayed ,
to battle , a fair breeze broke out anew ,
" he seemed to be a kind of connecting link between the old times
wi ' the new - made london band ?
by the rushing in the spring - time ,
from the stream to the castle 's western wing
cloths laboured o'er with handicraft , and purple proud is there ;
the canniest gate , the strife is sair ;
was filling baskets -- the prettiest girl
with ruthless war troy 's gallant sons no more .
in wrath transform ,
of struggle , and temptation , and retreat !
the duke 's huntsman frees his mind to his friend as to his
prolong my winter all the year ,
set sail scarce farther than for mogadore
by dim and half - remembered pain
while baby sister sleeps on mother 's breast ,
hurls it , there sprouting , as a grain of spelt ,
opposed their voyage , and with boist'rous waves .
and another chap , if you 've got the will ,
that now bears mine : for not with fiercer flame
the intended journey far ; since by the way
your horace , precious ( so you 've told him ) ,
aloft in freedom flies ,
but when without art
what art is his the written spells to find
the sofa 's burden till it 's time for tea . "
imputations contained in them , which suetonius did two hundred
white palaces wrought for love
and tampa became a vanishing speck .
appear'd , attended with their filial band ;
by lisbon 's sons assail'd shall strew the ground :
the ship rides trimmed , and from the eternal shore
on the peeress of england , on afric 's dark daughter ,
the saintly for him sighed ;
thy streaming tears no more can move me ,
willow - trees and heavy brushwood ,
the music thou breathest on shemselnihar .
the beating of the guns grows louder .
- his wife must be the fool of wives ,
who gives from a sense of duty ;
bothe in this world and ek in hevene .
and thought by that ; to gain immortal _ fame _ .
left to the law , and mercy of his star ,
michael stood still and smoked , and flicked his ash away .
mas nunca moriré odiado .
which toss frail barks high upon
who seemed to take most cognizance of me .
o , ye lumberjacks , remember ,
where late we oft , when day was gone
who said , " what on earth shall i do ? "
they say the lion and the lizard keep
for singing to sylvia ! )
doth nature feed and foster on land and sea
nor dost thou mark , though fondly true ,
of unkissed kisses , and songs never sung .
sound the clarion - peals of fame !
illos implacido letalis sirius igni ,
thy turret that surveys from high
the bird was sitting in his cage ,
and speak when he is spoken to ,
of qualities i saw the good collector ,
within the house of sable friars
and be applauded and make money--
and feasted , while the torches and the queen
fury was ev'rywhere raging , and artful , cowardly weakness .
euripides , who has a warmth and colour of passion which few ,
the blue bird , or magical tree ?
laude : sed in vitium libertas excidit , & vim
for all the waste that , eating , drinking here
to you a simple bardie 's prayers
the particles of bodies long and short ,
" some glance or step which at the mirror tried
balow , my boy , ly still and sleep ,
author of the ' istrian war . ' ]
called melmillo -- three -- two -- one--
outcast from her father 's dwelling ,
artistic treatment . the criticisms of horace on this subject are
to the net of the magicians .
a gift of honour , second but to mine ,
torn from the motherly bowl , the homely spoon ,
which could twelve hundred years withstand
filling the fibrous dimness with long generations of eyes .
i see thee , pale and pure , with flowing hair ,
thelogonus , his thoght he sette
golden on his trappings shining
yet to that heart , ah ! still how dear !
you act at once whene'er you find
one , in the perfect sense of eastern mention ,
he waves the ruffled forest on his brow ,
when i wuz somewhat younger ,
" of all the mickle comfort / now an end is made ,
jake mato me wium !
--raised o'er the woof , by beauty 's hand inwrought ,
spake the reckless lemminkainen :
flemish carvers , lombard gilders ,
the hare now leads them in the chase
( as the fall of the victim , is marked by the splash )    }
and the mouldering dust that years have made
it grows more honest , more veracious ;
i may rouse the blear - eyed world ,
anon out of the earth a fabrick huge
and solemn wood in softened din ,
to different tasks their toil the nymphs address'd :
to catch a glimpse of the lotus - flower .
to heavenly haunts , where , clad in brightness ,
it seemeth me too much
yet did saint bernard 's abbot there
trample not with thy soles the heads of the wretched weary
trust to the lord to hide thee ,
and to remember the lady 's love ,
flushes beneath its gray .
for every little dream of dust
these shelves admit not any modern book .
on ‡ _ h----y _ ’s learned page , dull - sporting trod ,
on certain characteristics of tragedy the briefest reminder will
too wise to look through optics black or blue)--
saw he none of all the dwellings
all our aims are prejudicial
thou glorious mirror , where the almighty 's form
our hearts must still be bold ,
go in they do ; come out no more .
fierce war , and faithful love,{37 }
and worthy of remark as such ;
sharp and well temper'd lances the chosen champions bore .
while those who gave the hens a call
_ ambivius turpia _ , the stage ' squire appear'd ,
labour nat man with to moche besy cure
seven times one are seven .
not many nights they spending in this sort ,
the valiant champions , nor their persons wound ;
" i bore and nursed them , struggling still
the flaming ramparts of the world , until
for the telegram waited me at my room ....
close over you and in your ears will be the gurgling
a lake there lies , at foot of that proud alp ,
me comp'ny , and we 'd set around for hours
he will not fail , but bless us all in peace . "
las palabras ardientes á sonar ;
fades back again to him who sent it forth ;
there , heavenly guardian , there thy watchful eye
made offer of a thousand kine ,
{ 34c } sc . " than to bide safely here , " -- a common figure of
" what chance or destiny , " thus he began ,
und die fift ' idee - ash learnin ' ish de cratest ding on eart ' ,
who knows just how it will all end?--
all but poor nancy , set under a pan ,
and in the signs of the careful study of the annals which may be
the eternal note of sadness in .
dipt in the fountain of eternal love .
spreads desolation round a guilty land ;
but the stars throng out in their glory ,
dead be the past and its phantoms to me !
laboriosissime exercuit . ' sueton . ii . 84 .
to hills that prop the polar star ;
thrust forward heads upon the parts of it ,
thy father , that good earle of rare renowne ,
and pouring in from near and far ,
in other worlds i loved you , long ago ;
till he arrived at the christian host ;
spring forth to life and bloom .
what might be done if men were wise--
and of that second region will i sing ,
from the vexatious thoughts that come and go
o dire effects of tyrant power !
a very pretty squirrel track ;
blowbladder st . was famous . cf . the actress 's ' copper tail ' in
and many to the steep of highgate hie .
the maithil lady , tender - souled ,
night 's illusions
and the troubled sea enlarges .
than all the leagues they 'd tramped before .
thy face is fair with love 's eternal bloom ,
intolerant of all the new opinions .
to make return thy prisoner eke with thee ;
toward thee , my god .
and chased us south along .
looks forth . he sees god 's purple wall
when i venture to remember it , i quail !
by the great stars attended
and the proud defiance deep in heart he bore ;
proud signild , as if they were brothers of mine . ”
poor return for her hospitality . ]
materials which had made their impressions on the poet 's
ten miles beyend the end of space .
now to the justice borne along ,
from a single grain of barley ,
and hoary filth besprinkled all the man .
not longer then since i in one night freed
till i answer , ' rise , and go ! '
i gave to love the fairest rose
that kept so many warm .
by day or night ,
hurl a courageous splendid light
for you can not kill the immortal .
the cat and the fiddle ,
what then ? poor beastie , thou maun live !
and scatter glories round ;
trembling , by walter 's hand i held ,
sing the vengeance of the welshmen of tirawley .
that daring men might dare and reach :
pluck'd from the fire the child , and laid him down ;
hoch über menschliches hinaus .
as moonbeam on a mountain - mere
still somewhat urg'd me ) hinder my approach .
and watches with superb indifferent eyes
what think you they cried ?
whereto they had nailed my heart and thee
for there was robin supping at his table ,
his figure such as might his soul proclaim ;
a male apparition,--the image of him
the shining steps of nature , shares with man
forget the impression his case made upon me . here is the
to bless this little filial flock ,
the college of the mourning hypocrites ,
thir citie , his temple , and his holy ark
and man , with arm uplifted still to slay ,
it is not they who boast the best to see ,
intend to improve these precious hours .
was nothing but a boar !
would you blame me if to - morrow
i ne'er forgot its beauty or its truth ;
and saints embrace thee with a love like mine .
and golden reins the immortal coursers hold .
this slugger had been hired for such deeds ,
nor warm the fair for whom i burn ;
i dreamed a new dream as the sleeper can ,
his monarch and his native land
to feel , like paul , " however weak we be ,
i have a boy of five years old ,
had paid him very large .
the clouds condense , when in this upper space
he soon will come across the wave
and certainly he was a good fellaw .
who go our gifts to pay . "
the spirits , that languish'd through the murky vale
i 've seen the bud upon the timmer ,
riding his eagle through the crowd ,
as her proud glance she bent
vast they were , and strange to see
who wo n't give his consent ; or some tiresome ma ,
without a friend , or wife to cheer your gloom ;
made him younger and of more imposing presence ; she gave him
so strange , and yet so palpable , that i
where streams allay her dust and heat .
by lamps and lanthorns guided through the shade ,
that which they love most tenderly ;
fruit of kisses
and loudly to her husband cried
if ' twould , my love , would i advise it ?
now jo 's a swell lieutenant , and he 's keepin '
thou sternly taught the " chosen " hebrew race--
automobile . "
that lay in the house that jack built .
then who can blame me that i love the good old dog iron days ,
renown'd of jove ; therefore his wavering mind
and , watching on his breast the ruddy stain ,
and sun and sky descend upon the earth
and hearts and hopes to - day so cold ,
with this he left them and went onward to nestor , the facile
and handkerchief from nose new - blown ,
hasten to the burning mountain ,
like a great , dark stormy sea -- but sudden
' oh , mind the rascal , teague , do n't let him spill me ;
haroun , who felt that on a soul like this
i will hurl thee to manala ,
green pastures she views in the midst of the dale ,
have surrounded their names and deeds . is it that
clear sunshine through my gloom ?
should i prize this place of rest , and release
perhaps re - lives it as perfume .
in haste , orlando takes his arms and steed ,
soft his eyes , as stars in spring - time ,
they lie where the lean water - worm
one , rising mightier than her heavy reins ,
and never miss , children would kiss our hands
none can have this full salvation ,
i thought the motion of the boundless deep
strikes through the thousand lives that fold it round ,
the affection in the look , if it be such
{ 125 } see the authoress of the odyssey , pp . 140 , 141 . the real
of stubborn native oak , and two palms thick .
whilst , gliding with a fixed impulse still ,
dusty was the kiss
that from such causes could become ; much less
as she whispered low , “ you see ,
i know the need of the world .
plenty enough . but , say , you aged sinner ,
and the dark smoke rolls up , and mingles with the air .
and they set him afloat ,
but cool and strange and lovely as death
nameless here forevermore .
an ' ' ere is orl the change i ever got :
which laid him late for dead at one huge blow .
over many a sick man 's bed .
foedera , terque fragor stagnis auditus avernis .
confess his strength ; but in the former wind
proteus foretells that thetis shall have a son , who shall be more
and at their head the foam - begotten witch ,
will i find again the lost ones loved so well ?
but rose and took four slaves each with a sword ,
|a boiled sheep 's head on sunday|
coast , islet , creek , and lithe promontory ,
that spendthrift recklessness , which still was not
three frieslanders in vain had vaunted them ;
then tell me how to woo thee , love ;
pain is to save from pain ; all punishment ,
clouds steal up from a far - off tryst , like titans into battalions
and clinging arms and yellow hair ,
full - blown , before us into rooms which gave
should do this thing , and flee away from them .
how time is slipping underneath our feet :
th ' insulted portraits should not stay
i could not see , for blinding tears ,
" it is not love , it is not love , " i said ,
what e're it be loue offers , still presume
obscure as these might blast your bays ;
they make with cap and bells !
somewhat that dimm'd their brightness ! thou hast chas'd
as lords , a spacious world , to our native heaven
computes his labour 's issue , that he seems
as she knows -- these many years .
when day is ended , and grey twilight flies
beauty and love are nigh ,
but the sea - caves rung , and the wild winds sung ,
slew menelaus ' pilot while he steer'd
all he hath seen erstwhile the father do .
satin - soft and redolent ;
for very cold to go to bed ,
stereotype edition . crown 8vo sewed mark 5,00 .
the threats of ocean and the storms of air ,
" and without so much as knocking
and the brambles caught in my gown--
' be it written ,
and leave in our town not even a trace
storm - music of the thunder - cloud--
they will love thy face , they will laud thy power ;
than calm elysium -- with a living bride ?
and flushes like dione 's kiss !
must not wreak the wrath of god upon these law-
of a life - long chain;--
her father did with joy behold,--
her father was at her side .
bulls , that walk the pastures in kingly - flashing coats !
one by one the flowers close ,
here thy sword i carry , / that gav'st thou me in friendship kind .
o nyce world , lo , thy discrecioun !
only the spirit liveth !
when england measured men by blows ,
we are no longer children .
if falsehood claims it , end the vain dispute ;
pennatus graditur zephyrus , vestigia propter
of joy he might have felt . the spirit culls
lending its licensed freedom to the tongue
were out of season :   never man , i think ,
advantage from thy gain shall win .
each divers way along the grisly rock ,
the loftiest poet of the saxon race !
and digs like a demented beast .
he trampled their dolls and ruined
then black despair precipitates their flight .
found the couch where he had rested ,
alas , compassion : and mercy bothe ar slayne .
and thou , o moon , spread over savage night
was n't through any scorn or dislike of you that he did it . and
here a mist , and there a mist ,
the friendless bodies of unburied men .
( here he drew a silk bag from his breast)--
was the savour of remorse .
she shuddered and paused , like a frighted steed ,
jolly - faced and stout ,
when he has passed on along the air
their faith 's heart beats , though her head swims
in a copper - banded vessel ,
lift up thy thoughts on high ;
" you want some breakfast too ? " and down
" wordsworth gave vent to his enthusiasm in six sonnets , which , as
is sacred to the lonely eremite ,
and , a sad fisher , gazes on the sky .
till thou returnest , i with him meantime
o my mother who hast reared me ,
who seek for pleasures in a barren land ,
in the midst of this tumult of feeling the paper he had received
and over the hills he scampered away
what was all this row about ? listen to what had
her eyes were rather soft than bright ,
in words , and many silently foresaw the coming death .
a glory trembled in his hair !
her white face over ,
to call to the battle thy armies forth :
ah , the lady 's tears might well fall fast ,
thus , seized with sacred fear , the monarch prayed ;
or down the cliff , or cast me midst the fire ,
let this my first epistle beg ye ,
sweets for a hundred flowery springs
for with them did siegfried to the fatal hunting go .
when on their way to save an errant knight
and see the winter storm - cloud cleft
callynge it thyne : thou lyest therin falsly
greenock , to a good old age . he said burns had little to learn in
wedgewood ( with the same . )
the place was thron'd like britain 's royal halls ,
and now he takes the open air ,
why do you lie with your legs ungainly huddled ,
and wrought so well ( though difficult to guide )
ran out amaine , to take his fathers part ,
here are the men -- i wonder if they ever go to church .
and visions full often intrude on my brain ,
to noble menelaus stood oppos'd
unto flowering shoot ,
but wonder ceases soon ; the weirdest thing
with a clear lead , the white jacket spotted with blue , sir ,
i long'd to join in friendship 's holy bands
that sche schal him to dethe winne
that bids thee treat him as the sage
soft as the fleeces of descending snows,(117 )
who felt whatever thing he thought .
places resounding in the famous past ,
while men of every sort and kind ,
and skipp't and skulk'd , and under hatches went .
the _ bookman _ gives me a vociferous cheer .
looks out with heavy eyes:--strange ,
o mally 's meek , mally 's sweet ,
in youthful form he came , in lovelier guise
stand ever in my view ; and not in vain ;
another aspect crichtoun showed ,
father of all light - houses , on the island of pharos , near
accompanied her to the continent :
which , due to me long since , is justly mine ?
a preface to his book .   i think a man can best write a preface
but throughout the night of terror
mule , the , v.
among the lordes to the halle ;
then in her self - same tones i heard , " go thou ,
a basket , stored with viands such as please
as he told them things that old , old men
on both sides ; high into the vault of heaven
as if the new reality of death
--'the gray - headed sexton
sic famous twa should disagree't ,
peterkin is here again : he wants another tale !
watching through the darkest night ;
turned like a little child who always runs
my need begets a shining world .   lo , in thy light am i.
midday , and the light streams down from above , flooding the
shoop hir to been , an houre after the pryme ,
with double fury bloody war to wage !
attendants are surrounded in utter loneliness may be partially
as 'll grumble , like them there alaskan bounders ;
this was the poodle 's real core ,
all who above there have from us returned .
billing and cooing .   whir ! take that , ye quakers .
" when , by the winds of autumn driven ,
and the perplexity could not be told
oh , how i love each line of it !
forget to flow , and nature 's wheels stand still ,
develop these . but , if there 's aught of worth ,
and am , as who seith , out of cure
the ocean ’s heart - enchanting shore ,
this ruthless wretch with the missing hair ;
iron collars round their necks and their eyes put out ,
a thought of birds ,
and vision once again to bless your life .
broke , and the gray fog lifted , there i saw
it would be the last
and taking heart , i battle on anew ;
and when the words were ended , not unlike
" i suppose , " with a laugh , she said ,
wept softly over him , the whole night through ,
i beare thee , and unweeting have offended ,
to every middlesex village and farm ,
listen'd and wept----away !
oh , calm , cold , crueller than ice .
that doubting pleases me no less than knowing !
nor heed those blood - stains on the wall ,
thogh such an happ of love asterte ,
i wish you were not quite so deaf--
upon the strong man : and the haughty form
" if soul that to the verge of life delays
telling wonders from the sky !
he quaff'd the gore ; and straight his soldier knew ,
as we erewhile , astounded and amaz'd ,
as though the past should answer me , and i
_ the chains spontaneously fall off . _
with the world forgotten dead .
is any glamour in the case ?
" the ropes , the ropes !   apollo send us ropes , "
marinero que la manda
for he mot gon , or ben untrewe ,
query and clue ,
i felt in my pocket and gave my friends some money .
come to the garden , where when blossoms die
with his flames from above
nor has the mavis ever sang
waits in the vale to strew with flowers his way .
our loins are girded , let us try
of your strange doubts :   they well might be :   i seem
and i will mingle with your glowing , gentle
from the deeper caves the bill - fish ;
the roughest crowd that ever drew breath --
we have lived , we have loved , we have suffered . . . even so .
of all around were standing / perceived him never any one .
true nobleman with many friends ,
is this , the doom whose date brings low
hast thought on kama , o , command him now :
and widowed many a tender wife .
the book was rather shabby , but kate with paste and thread
with tidings of the peace so many years
but he was refused , for fear , said they ,
till god 's love set thee at his side again !
drove out the neri party from the former place , destroying their
but not of that deep hour , unspeakable
caught in a burst of unexpected storm ,
all alone upon a prairie ;
that thou hadst had , shall be but dreams indeed
they are weeping bitterly !
golden is the sand .
she only smiles , and stretches out her hands .
if sadly thinking , with spirits sinking ,
o troy?--may never tongue pronounce thee more !
while other ports to freedom rise ,
that they rave over middle - aged actors ,
of giant bodies move ;
a sphere of simple green ,
now chloreus , bond of cybele and priest upon a while ,
" wherefore ten years ago wast thou not known ,
bliss .
yet ' t is a painful feeling , and unwilling ,
and euer weare in memorie of her ,
oppose his utmost . either he shall gain
ever to leeward the great hulks careen ;
see his bow broke , and ensigns torn .
and when nor hunger more nor thirst of wine
well i can quaff , i see ,
i have no wish to rail at fate ,
the rapid march , the life of the camp ,
love to the death will pine
that steadfast , mournful strain , consoled
eternal watch , unshaken , strong , and true ,
when the deer sweeps by , and the hounds are in cry ,
and birds in feathers and beasts in furs
to draw men 's eyes and hands , and yet how cold ,
i waves no flag :   i only know ,
guirnaldas coronad mi temulenta
of sudden lightning dazzlingly reveal'd
the first land they saw was the pitch of cape cod ,
back from our gates , but enter thou in peace
fluttering and dancing in the breeze .
then drew my hand against her glowing cheek ,
and now behold , comes bramimunde the queen ;
i'se ' rived to de opinion dat he ai n't my style o ' beau ,
i would not have you sorrowing and sad ,
al that ye tellen it is skile :
flesh to flesh with skill she places ,
the rhythm perfect , and the burden sweet .
out a poetical thought , and afterwards polish it so as to be
times blessed , who perished on a time in wide troy - land ,
standing on their hilts their broadswords ,
breast - high to daunt her ; daphne , by a prayer ,
no shrewish teares shall fill our eye
escape the land that locks them in its grave ?
soon as the lord of rhineland had come within the door ,
solace of mortals and delight of gods ,
mine , by the grave 's repeal
to recollection
which every hour , our whole life long ,
every nerve from out its barriers rises ,
'cause when yer came ter me i like ter died ,
because i haue not folowed your co[=u]sel , but al thing
may blow from temporal heavens overcast .
crying and calling still .
to them he 'll diminish his bill ;
thenceforth , o daughter wise of jove , i thee
i will no trophy , triumph , spoil of thee ,
of things fallacious to have risen up
speaks these words of magic import
the order of the phrases makes
these shameless ones all mock at thee . to shun their
then , child of misfortune , come hither ,
the number thus of the greatest that doth fit
likewise wheat from foreign countries .
fair creature , kill'd too soon by death 's sharp sting !
no , we sought for your lives and goods ,
from bridge to bridge thus , speaking other things
the force of ariodantes ' circling brand :
and on the heights of calydon ; the first
bent o'er you with lips of flame ,
over meadow , over mountain ,
the day would sooner than the tale be done !
now bind we on the helmet , / --wisdom doth the same command . "
should that debar me from a purer place ?
fluttered round his bead in fury ,
and her ropes are taut with the dew ,
for wo was him , that what to doon he niste ,
his faithful dog his fate doth share ;
critical and grammatical studies
cicero -- by hamilton and clark .
more easie , wholsom thirst and appetite
after the bee . "
before him then his favorite gemalfin
a baby 's eyes .
mind with mind did never meet ;
a sudden mad desire surprised and seized--
" then thus in short my fix’d resolves attend ,
have i not as truly served thee ,
and hold discourse with mother mine . ”
flaunt out visible as ever the various ship - signals !
writhes on its neighbour 's face ;
and the feast at length was over ,
when love comes singing to his heart
his poetical rubbish concocting .
and woods the blue - bird 's warble know ,
on planks of british oak !
prone on his tomb her form she flung , and pour'd
she saw the life blood pumping through the shirt ,
and rested after thy long road , " so spake
the death of the suitors . penelope scarcely credits her ; but
and he also said " ho ! ho ! "
oh , i tell you that was a summer ,
of mars , and thus in accents wing'd he said .
night turns to day , vol . i. , 255 .
so , in dawe 's face , what met the eye
" thou yet shalt be crowned .
saw your naked heart and loved you .
till all its time be rounded ; headlong she
_ yami hê kam sharanam ! _
and the cringing knee bent low--
none can disturb thee,--sleep and rest .
from her sad couch she sprang forlorn ,
and the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
prec .   i can not love thee more ; my heart is full .
astrology under the name of " bickerstaff ; " the " argument against
of daylight and its toil and strife ,
did angerbode , the giantess , bring forth--
imaged in every lustrous star .
yet virgin from the kisses of the sun ,
glistening in the silver sunshine ,
sometimes they sing of foolish things ,
the lord will never hear :
no common architect would he engage ;
above the erythraean sea is spawn'd .
to read them in the tongue they spoke .
just then apollo happened--"heigh - ho !
all their attempts to bend thee down
as soft as now severe , our temper chang'd
it reappears once more ,
l'hist .   de fr . 1145 . they have even been preferred to al1 the
we have sung the hillside city
in this forced flight , is -- murdering as he goes !
in the spring ,
somebody said in the street this morning ,
as thes fruits of pure nature ; where no art
the eternal wisdom - singer ,
and hoarsely answered " step inside , my lad ,
our giver of good counsel and good luck . '
the mist and the river , the hill and the shade ;
which was the faireste of visage
curling to the home of ukko .
fatigued , mournful hands !   not a stream of stray hair
i brooded on the wise athenian 's tale
met his , and this reply was made :
were mellow music match'd with him . " ]
and such eclipse in heav'n methinks was seen ,
weep thy girlish tears !
they shall eat of its fruit and wax fat :
said " _ comment vous portez vous ? _ "
a blonde , full - blooded man he was , and arrogant of eye ;
laugh'd , sang , and jump'd about for joy ;
awe - stricken by the universal gloom ,
but , though i trust his prayers are said ,
she , foe alike to both , the brands dispersed
and is his propre be the lawe ,
it?--but i can assure you that the sound was most misleading .
but with how much reason i do not know .
alike , to slay the king , or woo the queen .
of all the blooming spoils possess'd ,
do mercy forth with rihtwisnesse ,
till youth and genial years are flown ,
her eyes are full of light and fixed on something
but now was turning my desire and will ,
of secrets yet to explore .
which my sins made ,
that witness'd to their chief the aid divine :
unto true life , not ' sine causa ' here
some clown 's coarse lungs will poison thy sweet flower ,
on frozen caucasus ; and helicen
and bless'd the copper - colour'd boy . "
how the merry lemminkainen ,
and sainte marie the world doth sway ,
with green vines trailing round and o'er
with the same colour which , through sun adverse ,
nor that which on the flaming mount appeerd
her feature or her fashion .
real or fancied interest in the thing analyzed , it will not be
’ tis thine , o mighty chief , to share
wouldst thou haue me pittie before they doe ?
wherewith the towers once or twice did shake ,
as by his word the mighty father made
i am in spirit praying
brown , green , and red , and white ;
" young kullervo is not fitted
be here -- and there !
high on the heights of wessex
as up and down the beach we flit ,
and , with the human voice , disturb my lonesome reign . "
o'er hill and vale is breathing ,
" his arm and pen of equal strength we call ,
thy proffer'd presents , to achilles ' wrong .
on their hot rage what heavy vengeance fell .
in a brief moment on some maiden 's cheek ,
freewill hath brought us hither , forethought planned
the mind
if you would pass the dangers of the road .
he now , without reserve , ' gan tell the peer .
she 'd allus take up perry 's side
against the beamy flood
' tis not the office of the muse ,
keep much that i resign :
to throw over pu'pit the names of the peair
first for fleet chariot - racers he ordained a noble prize , a woman
came to this glen , and took up his abode
" then i called for her
vpon his complaynt whan he first began
his breakfast , dinner , and tea , oh .
shahbo'min , the gooseberry .
and the law shakes hands with crime ,
ancient flame began to waver , murmuring , even as a flame that the
felt them in her bosom glow ,
gods are stronger than men . as often as he would strive to stand
and triśirás the fierce was slain ,
" you are down ! " he exclaimed .
his formidable head , and heifer - swift ,
spin a tress for viola .
had left each outward part ,
albeit not so lofty nor so thick ,
have lovers held , knit hand in hand ,
i 'd have a christmas pudding every day i dined at home ;
" i have been a starved pauper too long .
answer sea ,
the bobbs - merrill company , for poems by james whitcomb riley .
he serve his term out . our pa he--
what him did promise siegfried , / thereon his mind was bent .
thou art the riches that make lovers mad .
o you who lose the art of hope ,
loud is the vale;--this inland depth
their wreaths are willows and their tribute , tears ;
alike to no such aureate earth are turn'd
ne'er from their close and narrow circle flinch .
and sad guimaria 's meadows blush'd with gore ;
that no offensive thought was meant ,
silenus rises from his bed
perhaps thy capital seate , from whence had spred
worthier of acorns than of other food
tell me of other worlds ?
the thoughts we think have been thought before ;
would herald the glad news forth to the throng ,
in shushan toward ecbatane
my homage to her door ,
“ o what a rare and wondrous sight !
was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road
and he only can give me rest !
were for man 's benefit -- as we may boast---
the tendons twain behind the knee it snapped ,
such awful righteous wrath who would excite ?
besides , his conduct , since in england , grew more
shame were it , grecians ! should we seek by flight
that laconic old person of wick .
when jenny wren was young ,
down to the open postern did i steal ,
atrides dragg'd the body to his own .
her headlong cataracts , and circumfluent waves .
leper , in his grey gown , was obliged to hold a similar object ,
but -- how the deuce did gubbins rise ?
spir . back , shepherds , back ! enough your play
to come to such like blows .
" hosanna . "   above , their beauteous garniture
' you have not heard the end : _ god knows , i speak it
to help , i knew .   when these had passed ,
with thy mellow , breezy bass .
as thy softest limbs i feel
or spot them sideways with your weather eye ,
both me and you lays back and shakes at
things that shall never , never be to mortal hearers told .
through thee when so distressed .
endless cascades in the abounding joy that scatters and gives up
ofttimes the doctrine evangelical .
all my soul grew wild with yearning for the sight of you
a light , my weeping one , begins to dawn
there thou , sweet saint , before the choir shalt go ,
and odorous amomum : swaths of nard
to add to golden numbers , golden numbers ?
salt ocean : wafted thence by tide of flood ,
it was his steed that stumbled ; ' twas heaven would have it so .
the hasty harvest in his bosom brings ;
but trijaṭá , of softer mould ,
' tis not _ my _ sphere ; a mighty stirring song
tempora conspergunt viridantis floribus herbas .
and one see clear ,
' but , cold as christmas , to the conflict came ! '
but , if i had , i beg to say
but my kisses bring again ,
ye witness , ye new - built towers !
a form rose , strange of mould :
sternly his hand withdrew , and strode away .
to think that amaryllis had grown old .
and the hungry eyes of the boondi queen
to council , of whom many came with wine
where ladies , doubtless , cheered the hearth
over deucalion 's dark flood ,
is dying of _ angina pectoris_;--
restraint of any veil , which had she borne
he fled the cellar , in his agony
nor held himself from fault exempt .
all night in sleep , and haunt the light
for murder banish'd from his native home .
most sweet -- most melancholy .
damayanti , ever after -- she the swan 's sweet speech had heard--
tanned the skins of bear and beaver ,
crambo - clink , rhyme , doggerel .
( both in body and in spirit to the heavens he departed ,
and odorous amomum : swaths of nard
life 's purpose in a sigh ,
some rise , and bounding with the billows go :
sleep thou there upon the meadow ,
fear not ; the leaves will strew
the pauper be a king--
' but when the next day brake from under ground--
miniature of knightly virtues .
up ! up ! my friend , and clear your looks ;
was not that kind ?
with the gold and turquoise softly blend .
beneath this southern axle of the world
art 's handy work they thought they might adore ,
for all the idle things i think :
years of unutterable torment , stern and still ,
we have come back again
more merrily than the chastened voice of winds
long the days , and cold , and dreary ,
the frailest , the most fond , an insect on the wind ,
and tales of ghost and fay ?
spring through the birch - tree 's veins is flowing ,
this is the manner of the girl 's conception ,
by human eyes ,
on june - drunk beds of roses red,--lies thrown .
his reverend part adorning ,
her fair hand with grateful feeling .
ne'er saw i , never felt , a calm so deep !
now is changed , i quite forgotten .
if men will stoop to kiss the truth ,
the trump is blown ?
the distant huntsman winds his horn ,
with puncture of the goad , promise to slay
that would never either / from the settle rise
he ca n't find things like me .
elizabeth . _ late _ forgot : lately .
smilingly float them on the vast deep .   children have their play
and it was in the same tone that lindley answered : " let 's wonder ,
we wallow in our sin ,
state capital ; and latterly a prolonged session of
and the more i say it , the more ravished is my
lead me to her chamber of rest !
but oh ! when the clouds have all vanished away ,
why , what did she do ?
climb this tree , dear ilmarinen ,
and his vineyards in emerald drest --
with gold ! _
calmely i did reflect ;
emptied of the old jests .
contiguous might distemper the whole frame :
fast speeding onward to the main ,
and the thousand charms belonging
my dreaming eyes saw eros from afar
and many a barbarous form is seen
we fished , through forests wends its way ,
give friendly gifts in plenty from our abundant store .
along the babbling waters . turnus straight
( here he grew inarticulate with retching . )
my beloved , helpful mother ,
laid with one blast the ship on her beam ends .
she uttered , " then i do not hope in vain ! "
i take thee by the hand .
treachery , had put him to death , and buried him on that spot . ]
_ 127 . si jeunesse savait , si vieillesse pouvait _
drank at the last sad supper with his own .
no tears recall our lost alcander home ,
whose speedy van , their reare had almost raught ,
a harmless life , and ignorant of deceit ,
we find the sky draped in sable . "
and his own ardor in their souls inspir'd .
for why ? my mind despise them all .
nor more will i speak of wrong ,
" o father , is there help for such a one , "
are vain to daunt her gladness ; all the while
" she greets the shores of france and spain ;
for joyous hours they soon will build ,
cautum et statutum ius erat ,
studded with stars;--it is no dream :
and fulk and fiery oscar fell ,
and love now nestles in my soul .
your house and coach , both day and night ,
is short of what a mind well - govern'd knows .
even so was i , a queen , child of a queen . "
thee _ , ' or , ' _ it helps thee not _ , ' and similar expressions . " ]
former , because the last is written in latin verse .   the " secchia
made little progress in improving life
" may never evet nor the toad
as more in number distant from the first ,
so without chance or change , so without stain ,
then bade his treasure - keeper bring
and by the arms - full , with a breast unhid ,
leap from out their hiding - places
i can only cry and cling !
glad is my voice now , so free it may sing for you
but driven by that back - rushing tide
_ deus est deus pauperum _ .
do you
and so i 'll borrow one of jove 's own tricks :
by zephyr 's breath impell'd ; as from afar
know whether i be dextrous to subdue
of an old princely house , true through change to the race
_ mrs . fountain _ , taking a bundle from her : " if this is another
i 've walked with me and talked with me
thy mother france , free and republican ,
deft to ridicule or rally ,
not with bare justice shall your act be crowned ,
there came on thee the lust of these .
of a magnificent castle we arriv'd ,
my sun has his sun and round him obediently wheels ,
with thee and with thy peers let him advise ,
laus , benedictio , coniubilatio personat ipsi .
now of that long pursuit
nature , who so freely scatterest !
por la doblez y el oro , y si te mueven
the broken cable and the driven sail .
and fear was born in my heart
swelling taut , shuddering in quick collapse ,
all freezing in the cold :
and many herods lie in wait each hour
she leaned across the grassy space
if i could hear the green piles groaning
far , as is measur'd for a mile on earth ,
all day i 'd watch the blue sky -- all night i 'd watch the black ,
' ole unc ' gabe ' 's my name ;
never once wakes she .
the one thing to do in the brief little space ,
i am , this temple keeps its shrine
and each wing emitted silver ,
--is it with hate or with misery?--
nemo me dacrumis decoret nec funera fletu
behold a hawker 's spirit !
despise the brood of blessed sapience .
- my version , madam , runs not to that end .
o waly waly , but love be bonny
with purpose of my lady to inquire
withdraws his timid horn ,
short intermission bought with double smart .
and burn'd and shook down splendour like a sun .
and its root bears fruit for ever .
waiteth the dawning .
all else is breath !
upon the bone .
his ancient sire , through roland 's chivalry )
ah ! woe when lost the heavenly confidence ,
there dances fair kirstine , her hair hanging wild .
she 's one to get a young fool in her clutch ,
and his sledge with golden trimmings
for such a two as tor and lamorak :
but dusky cobwebs of a dream ?
where lives of hermits we may lead ,
and with so many knights he measured arms ;
my soul illumined with a rapture rare .
a rat - tat - too o ' knives an ' forks , a clinkty - clink o ' glasses :
vain ribald that i am--
of that great lord , which therein wo nt to dwell ,
lo , to the palace i direct thy way ;
when life was all life , all illumined its rays ;
or the dawn of day appearing ? "
smooth slope the lawns , the grey rock peeps between ;
amorwe , whan the court is set ,
meanwhile my spirit anchors calm
" while to the shore the rapid vessel flies ,
the snowy flowers burned . so , first earth ’s shame
the sunset swam unshadowed to the shore .
to leap the dusty deadline . for my own
and heaved how many a groan ,
" i , " said the fly ,
still all things in this glade go through
ho ! ho ! pale brother , " laughed the wine ,
each hour , in passing , hoarsely sings .
e'er struck so deep as that sly dart they wield ,
so long a time had been , that in her presence
although they 're apt to grumble some--
þurȝ an apple þat he vpon con byte ;
to see what he could hear now in her laugh
she made the bed baith large and wide ,
meh'i - lai'nen .    the honey - bee .
now because i remain when the puppies are gone
grew dark as they were speaking .
and , for a proper life , gained from the good , renown .
and then -- she heard a voice ; she was not wrong :
the trembling wretch with terror faint .
and servant of the lamb , was ushered from
that i am never of such as those . "
" a man he was to all the country dear ,
leads them through the sweet green shadows ,
ourselves must we beneath the springing turf
the auld guidman raught down the pock ,
his services . he kiss'd hands the next day ,
the mainyard rent from the mast where it ran ;
know not what this is that stirs in me -- i know not its meaning .
hath finished half his journey , and scarce begins
hath it indeed been plundered , or but cleared ?
and take from seventy springs a score ,
back he has striven ,
thither let us bend all our thoughts , to learn
they knew not whence this bounty , and elate
we , who lie here , have nothing more to pray .
mother 's present .
i know not ;
rioting they pass--
stars now they sparkle
where , if you watch ,
of the quiet wayfarer
on ... on ... with swift and steady pace
in life . ' ' i live , and it may help thy case , '
get up , sweet - slug - a - bed , and see
he spake , whom all approved , and forth they went ,
of that stern majesty , which doth surround
betimes my matins say :
and there would i lay down and die .
you who are but god 's servant -- surely you
since no time can e'er recover
and that was after i 'd been told
a damsel weeping loud , and cried , " o queen !
you 'll find , if once the monarch acts the monk ,
thei holde it sikerliche wonne .
and some were full of merriment , and all were kind and dear :
the holy one of heaven ,      as i have heard said ,
and much surprised was i that , spent and dead ,
rose to the skies a dusty cloud ,
the herte of this romein so sore ,
our simple life wants little , and true taste
an ' uncle sid 's here , too -- an ' he
raised clenched and ineffectual palms to let
" that i will , my pore mary , " mrs . roney says she ;
wild goburra ’s song .
and now she flitted , and now she stepped ,
given him by this great conference to know
an ereaesaes that wase wonande ,
would instantly have found its way
of a city and mountain of arabia , or india . the tradition was ,
the teacher , panting like a man forespent ,
of men who make a business of religion ,
and so it chanced , for many a door was wide ,
scarce thy week 's swearing brings thee off of one ;
' an oyster may be cross'd in love,'--and why ?
sweet as the water of samaria 's well
and to - night no moon we see ! "
caress , bears the arbutus ' missive , one
where unto a bag - pipe 's drone
o ' half his days ;
and heard the voice of the gathering - horn
note vii .
whose sorrow shook the land from east to west
the other , which as the matter is known to thee , may truly be
where first is found the last ward of the city
nor would i indeed forbid you
its slight dark shadow on the moonlit turf ,
and found myself all self above ,
the truth about the poem , but the historical truth , into
love , look not back , for , all too brief , our day ,
in visage is disturbed , remembering
lodged in the chaste board of the garden fence ,
grows the red creed of the arabian horde ;
the watchman cried " past one , " and -- i awoke .
missiles -- not of steel but firwood -
that lightly rain from ladies ' hands .
the whiles an hundred little winged loves ,
and at night the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars .
upon the bridge i forward bent to look ,
" o spare , thou noble baron , spare
the king of argier , overwhelmed with woe .
if violence a thousand times distort it .
in england once more for to raign ;
the trees , now naked groaning ,
and up on the hill sat he ;
i open every door ;
brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried ,
dreadful winter of forty , she was called from her bed by him four
i saw the eagle dart into the hull
breasting the cold , dank rain ,
balm of the wound and heft of the knife .
because returning paris ward again ,
to falle anon before his face
for confessor , " said i , " vouchsafe to me
there 's one odd volume left to be
" that all persons are to perform the militia duty , excepting the
by councils oecumenical ,
would urge a base retreat ;
how the water came from ether ,
rangeth by night his hoped prey to get ,
that still kept mounting , mounting like a sea ,
crows from the purple - clover hill ;
and so .... but that is nothing to the point ,
kullerwoinen grinds his hatchet ,
it was na my true love , ye met by the tree :
so many base lies you have sent them in print ,
that bud of brief existence ,
and celebrates his shame in open day ,
it is better to die for the flag ,
and sooth'd her with consolatory words !
and gave a pledge his life that kept
made a melancholy show ,
is sprinkling thick on his meek old head .
us childern all wish _ we 'd ' a ' _ bin
you have thrown your arms about a drift of leaves ,
smite ,           smot ,                smiten .
as he handed him out the innocent match ;
around me , whichsoever way i move ,
o music of the falling rain ,
" or thoughtless laugh , or constant weep ,
where the tiles baked my brains all july ,
foe who has dyed them red .
heart !
do the murex - fishers
he praised so often in his rhyme ,
and what the maiden thought of i can not , can not tell .
for ' midst thy faults we all esteemed thy worth .
had mind of his glory :   with might his glaive
the number made the motion slower .
and ask in what i pleased or who i pleased
beyond the graveyard tree ;
a courteous king , and kind , was he ;
under the romance of fulk fitz - warine . ]
" on this subject just at present
who 're in the place to speak of which is hard ,
he insists that to be an artist one must know a great deal ,
that he the trouthe plein ne tolde .
earth of chaste love , life that is only life after love ,
who in the smile of honour , persian - like ,
heart has a boding , and so it shall be . neither shall
full many a piercing scream was heard ,
need not doubt but they were enjoined by the true god to his own
once met one must know more of .   and so it
the biting faulchion would have cleft his head .
propior : suberat tamen vigor animi ingentibus negotiis par , eo
no other inquest is on this received ;
what moves thee thus ?
wainamoinen calls his people ,
owned not his spirit 's government therein .
on burnished hooves his war - horse trode ;
there , you beheld the mermaid fair
i had n't a moment to talk to my girlie ;
tender as dawn 's first lull - fire , and intense
the angels sacred quire around
striving to cheer her :
their finding -- here this is ;
for the victor to draw ' gainst his own people his sword ;
the dreadful mystic key , nor have i touched
this gedeon awaiteth wel ,
ye godly councils wha hae blest this town ;
to visit , or the steward of his swine .
you waked and loved me so--
indra , unbidden , hastened near ,
let to - morrow take care of to - morrow ;
like some great angel 's face , blinded with bliss ,
i first grew dizzy , then gaed daft ,
was jest about give in ;
not thinking , soon that reeking , red , and raw ,
and for one little moment we are one
to waken the wild white flowers of the sea ,
beat in the lily - beds ,
the father heard the youth , and then
ay , knave , because thou strikest as a knight ,
o catch the swift - winged moment while ' tis near--
on the cheek of your sovereign rose ,
i do n't know no more than a dog or a cat
where a cheeld was aswingin ' jest afore ,
there sits my mother upon a stone ,
accordingly circe foretells , and ulysses foreknows ; the two are
through my rich , present life , to what beyond doth lie .
was fountain ; now as wave at flow
mightier and nobler than when man and wife are of one heart
to this the god : " ' t is yours , o queen , to will
but psyche , when her sister was gone forth ,
and of our well - beloved .   and let this
waste not thy body 's strength , nor taint thy soul ,
a shrine to hide his presence , and reveal
shrilling the heart of it , lost like the foam on its waves !
for up stood , for out stepped , for in struck amid all these
and not far otherwise we often see
from his pure and crystal clime .
of the low ground , when they were seen to stand
and answered him at full , as having been
what thou askest , noble brother ,
dyed purple , rushed along as if they meant
" nor think to make it thine without a fight :
at ev'ry " service " club reclining !
that the eternal beauties it unfolds .
our hearts for our sin - offerings lest they break ,
and serpentlike that none may injure thee .
like the glimpses a saint hath of heaven in his dreams .
to the length of his coverlet .   what have we here ?
and with my sword write ing'borg 's name .
lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead .
tho you have rhymed and rammed it down ,
quartier latin poète . _
where never cat glides o'er the green ,
not with more grief the afflicted swains appear ,
for thee these flow'rets strewed .
red cheeks , red cheeks ,
till darkness , or till death , shall cover all :
so still it lay that every day
git another!--i ca n't , boss ;
one thing i can , and one love cannot -- die .
our requiems follow fast on our evangels,--
boccaccio to his parent earth bequeathed
--here we are , then , at our boarding -- house . first , myself , the
he saw ephraim 's pistol so deadly in aim ,
its heart burst in blossom ' neath simmer 's warm breath ;
look once in heart back landward and adore ?
character of his poems , founded on the passion of love
of money and pleasure and fame ,
i ask not whence the order came
so we discours'd to where the rock first show'd
beside the springs of dove ,
to the deaths thou hast made us die ? "
“ six months with ceres dwell in heaven ; and six
to the hills where the cooling breezes blow ;
the mourning meads -- in tale have they such very name and sign .
might add to his last moments
but on the hither side of that loud morn
and two yellow satin bows
but , cut by giant shafts in twain ,
where the noblest dreams have died ,
service to rights divine , proved hollow :
" and is there nothing yet unsaid ,
i saw it , but i did not see within it
another canaan shall excel the old ,
a shirt , i trow , for me thou’lt sew ,
whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks :
to th ' stocks , or cornhill 's square exchange ;
this admired simplicity ,
to eat with a spoon .
o louis ! you that like them maist ,
to love my love withouten fear ;
such thy mishaps , o merit : feeble balls
why did i save the kisses of my lips
por esso no nos engañen ,
blend in the soul like the hues of even ,
thus in song she oft rehearsed , as did her well behove ,
attack'd the french as they supinely lay ;
the spanish maid , and cheers the spanish swain .
the stranger within my gates ,
two ajaxes arming themselves amid a host of foot - soldiers . as
like a sudden fire to them i climb .
the insulters off -- and oh ! that then as now ,
that this viage be not to thee looth .
and after all poor frederick may do better--
their heads in a row , like stones in a flood ,
nor the shining of the sunlight .
by that strange source whence men communicate ,
there stopped and burned out black , except a rim ,
what wonder if sir launfal now
should not be here , were it not that , still having power to sin ,
making the heaven of heavens his dwelling - place ,
light thy fires , and heat thine ovens ,
wo n't you be shore not to fail
a youthful son was now his prey,--
high dreams on fire with god ;
this wide and universal theatre
and the wild winds disturb the silent wood .
bartering , changing , extorting ,
of this prodigious unicorn .
how shall ye wear the yoke that must be worn ? )
transfusing through and through
on this she came down from her upper room , and while doing so
ergo desidiam quicumque uocabat amorem ,
das meer war still ,
this maiden , which desguised was ,
he will forgive me for exposing her
with lips of peace and eyes that can not weep ;
we are more than content , if you please ,
" he took a particular fancy for one of the postmen who delivers
deep the sleep that settles o'er him .
even sad vicissitude amused his soul :
who 's lived a cross old bachelor fer thirty year ' and more
hou that it was his oghne wif .
where purling brooks loosen their brown tresses ,
simkin well his mirth can place
in some dark desert den ,
the wrong that we do will soon find us out ,
in the first place heaven put it in my mind to set up a great
that sunday afternoon ,
to speed me with a bouquet ;
the village{8 } all declared how much he knew ;
shrinking with dread as she hears the tread
and purple - stainéd mouth ;
and thus this king thurgh prive hate
{ 4 } the muses that the country love .
he mourned romance , now on the town ,
his eyes how they twinkled ! his dimples how merry !
comprehension and acquiescence , and the visiter continued .
and in the sunshine they cosily sat ,
what , not one hour ? for star by star the night
cast him from yonder jutting promontory
as a man - child should deliverance come to greece ,
of pictures , i should like to own
i 've stood in margate , on a bridge of size
" why thus , lonely philomel , flows thy sad strain ?
thou from that path hast turned aside ,
for magnus ' fortunes gave no room for hope ,
what evil genius put you to't ? "
and sow its ghastly fields with flowers !
far in the west there lies a desert land , where the mountains
for rose i would perish ( pro tem . ) ;
" i am not worthy , of my own desert ,
here , a yet empty suitor in thy train ,
while round the town the fierce epeians stood .
( boring a hole in the edge of the table opposite to where frosch
going the same old human way
not many leaves scann'd o'er , observing well
pelted the bishops with hot buns ,
" mediocribus esse poetis
in the full foam of wrath and dread ,
they reach them , envy like the thunderbolt
from his nest by the white wave 's foam ;
yet hope itself a brightness throws
diverge , fine spokes of light , from the shape of my head , or any
and the forest robes grew sere ;
absorbing them .   ' tis love that beckons us
an ' kick your place ,
and if they know my lot ; and how
than he whose neck my arms enfold .
' twill die;--and when the good old tree is dead ,
unskaithed by hunger'd highland boors ;
and blind as are
high on a throne of royal state , which far
wind , wind , wind ; we toss and dream ;
in woods that fledge the round hill - shoulder
ardent , and them into the host of greece
arkeld : the stars in their courses move through the sky
" they made her a grave , too cold and damp
in strict order , with due method ;
but found no source,--so clear the sky
on the sledge himself he mounted ,
" what visitation hath there come from god
not now ; for first rogero is my care ,
ugly daughter of tuoni .
these were the elements,--and thine no less .
where thou didst lay thy sacred burden down . "
lo , how all dies ! o seer ,
of life ; the living voice she hears that said
your rose - colour , my queen ;
whether the lights were burning blue
endurances _ ( 1917 ) is the most representative work of this poet ,
and both assumed a sable hue ;
thenceforth innocuous ; lovelier than when ruled
and they searched out your wounds , your death - warrant tracing .
a temporal chalice of eternity
god is standing just behind .
the deeds of the great souls who climbed the stair
but cautious in the field , he shunn'd the sword ;
the world hath chang'd its count'nance , grasps his crook ,
on the cold hill 's side .
unwavering burns -- the symbol of our love ;
that other dreamless sleep of rest ,
cheer !   an ' we 'll never march to victory .
i can not say how much i love thee , words ,
and straightway lives above her pain .
the winds that will be howling at all hours
still treads the shadow of his foe ,
on pillar and pommel and chapiter high ,
sound through the dark , as through a dream , the call
of all the bliss the gentle gods have placed
troop to the infernal jail ,
new - slain , both hunger - pinch'd and haughty both .
to match his patience ' gainst her hate ,
clamb up the starry sky , man :
where no picnics are ,
and tall lily .
no mor the hete than the chele ,
her hangers - on cut short all ;
my land -- my people!--is that death in vain ? "
tyrant down .
about his bones ,
he had also contracted a curve in his spine
with my flying fancy , none may know ;
pulling all together , is called yagoe .
at least we can do this : we can set up
how abject lies this snarling thing !
if it adds to their wealth tho ' it brings on disgrace .
his felon deeds their end , beneath the mace
full wery eftir cowth weip ;
and lifts the trojan glory to the skies .
for most with pity heard his song , and marked
" they held to be rank blasphemies . "
in the forests of the death - land ,
for his folk and his fold ;      fallen shall lie
to prove our world of linear seed :
where erst was thickest fight , th ' angelic throng ,
mounting a summit whence he thinks to see
swift left for the starveall harebell - turved .
and was content to attempt that enterprise ,
but plainly say ,
in this his present fierce , man - hating mood ,
hic sacra quidem perimedes eurylochusque
to hide thee from thy servant 's eyes !
as other lovers do ;
his power to set her free .
mothers -- comrades the sweetest ,
with their tartans for their shrouds ,
horatian fame ;
save that we found ourselves within a cell ,
i found in them what they revealed
freshly in each succeeding note
and tok upon the clothes blake :
he ended , and the son gave signal high
but yestere'en i loved thee whole ,
when pain and anguish wring the brow ,
but oh ! through all the day and night
quae regit idalium , quae cnidon alma regit ,
we ruled the world for several hours !
amongst the _ commons _ is such freedom shown ,
since all eternity , a turban
appear thy form , thy feature , and thy mind . "
running just in time , she caught her
peach petals in wild cheeks , wan - wasted thro '
mere ordinary mortals ask ,
outward swell the rolling prairies like the waves of ocean deep ;
my dear old dog , most constant of all friends ;
and this is the truth that the poet says:--
the traveler dreams ,
against me , will i yield my prize .
he doubtless fabled as he parted hence.--
beneath his eastern star
come , draw thy circle , speak thine adjuration ,
" they say you 're wondrous wise ;
beneath a moon unseen albeit at full ,
men who can stand before a demagogue
a rope , which in the cavern on the ground ,
i am old ! you may trust me , linnet , linnet,--
de shtar of de shpirit 's light ?
" or break his harp and weep ! "
that no beam of light should cross the floor .
roland looketh to hill and plain ,
save the shrill - voiced cicala flitting round
grow , or advance in thought and deed ; i was
through the darkness drifted here
canterbury , " and all the remnant of their pilgrimage , " which
to have brought to italy king charlemagne ,
' no , such a genius never can lie still ; '
their movements when the trump was heard ,
iustly , great nature , didst thou brag , and tell
and for he hath destourbed kinde
who lords it now , a king , this white man 's who hath pressed
upon the bosom of that harmony ,
o turn thee round , resolve the doubt ;
for sure one star its baneful beam display’d
over an ocean of great content .
his beauty and his eagerness bewraying .
“ ordain that he may love , but love like me
then the lady addrest
the damsel put the pair without reply :
the noise of life grows less and less :
that after death - day may draw to his lord ,
two pieces , so that he fell from his chariot and let the reins
and now a level ocean grey
_ candidate _ , robed in white .
now every saint cleerly divine ,
linguists and contenders ,
" not before the judgment day
and me another mug of flip ; and put
who , as the tale is told to us ,
we have forgiven you because you are so fair ,
she bows him from the room , and puts the fruit
and with loose rein and bloody spur rode inland many a post .
¿ qué es la ciencia sin fe ? corcel sin freno ,
she fairly waltzed with rage ; she wept ;
but why such long prolusion and display ,
taken from men this morning ,
thou frightenest and confound'st me by thy words .
and we hear aye birds tune this merry lay ,
and unavenged?--arise ! ye goths , and glut your ire !
now al is done ; bring home the bride againe ;
on hidden rocks , which ( latins from of yore
or red with the earth that rain washed down ,
and makes all sweet within ,
and steals our embryos of iniquity .
hands wrenched away ...
taught her what fevers can inhabit clay ,
" o senseless spirit ! let thy horn for thee
but she escaped them ;
and my hurt soul in fierce defiance rose ,
conscious life - sustaining power .
this is the great god tyr ! _
their hearts are happy as can be ,
ye shall play no more with the fauns , i wis ,
over mount sion , and , though that were large ,
known by the name of dhundhumár .
friends of mine are all the serpents !
hid crafty observation ;
and warn them of the summer 's wrath to come .
mightier rovers ; they that planted
the account is soon cast up ; the judges rate
still ' long the nile the pink - winged curlews flock
behind their prison - bars ;
leaning from the lighted door a fair face afraid ,
that love hath mad him a querele
our ramblings in the northland .
broken , defeated , they came riding
when body 's vessel breaks adrift ,
the present memory will be grievous still .
whose brink when your adventurer slips
the grim , uncordial coast ,
that moved like gods among the trees ,
of anything sweet in the mouth could sweeten
whose was this plan , this cruel thought
and blush upon their branches year after year , and it is likely
devoutly giv'n ; for never mortal man
their upper lids?--hist !
with elfin lamps of white and red , and keys
if this be wrong , if heaven offended
the sunset flame,--
thirty - eighth adventure   how dietrich 's knights were all slain
the treaty off'rings to the gods ; the lambs ,
sipped the sweets of so - called pleasure ,
the sphinx that puzzled europe , for awhile .
of _ god _ 's dark secrets , and display
of florence city adorned by architect
him with his eyes he sought ; for him inquired ;
barked at by dogs , and torn by brier and thorn .
" my lord , let fear , let doubt and sorrow pass ,
amidst her smiling maids . nigh to the sea
predicament , sir , that we 're baith in ;
i , a lone she - bird of his feather .
slipped from him . ah , it made him glow
give worn humanity new youth .
thy base invectives men no more regard ;
and for prosperity to patient wait ;
now i am old -- and now these plains
from the floor arose a vapor ,
thy cup , like mine , still new replenished stands
to slay them both , nor suffer their return ,
than those their conqu'rors ; who leave behind
a three hours ' walk when she is moved to try her hand at cake !
kullervo , kalervo 's offspring ,
look to that world of spirits ,
far in the north atlantic 's sounding seas:--
creeping along from tent to tent ,
weep eyes , break heart !
the manzinetta pulp , the palm ,
carrying me in his bosom , as a child ,
the charm that the great spirit gives you .
if i should gaze and gaze in vain
there were three sailors of bristol city
and weep , but bow not an inch , for any foe !
and the broken parts united ,
oh women of achaia ; men no more !
once more on ráma will we gaze ,
so once , when high above the spheres
jes across de lane . "
than it eludes the hound .
he found the maid
gnashing of teeth , despair ;
the roses drooped in her gold - brown hair ,
mel'a - tar .    the goddess of the helm .
its sweet and freshly painted cup ,
which is always a matter of the greatest difficulty ; or we must
the shadows lurk along the shore ,
the loveliness of your most lovely face .
burly and big , and studious of his ease .
beholds thy glory imaged in his heart ?
the third part left , such is the chance of war .
from loues soft dartis : i say none on the grounde
soon under heavy loads they bent .
the other one , whose flowing tresses hide
in the light of its golden wings .
it resonant rings upon the tongue .
and then again they ai n't .
cried out to us : " o souls so merciless
soft birdie 's feather;--
let us sing no more lamenting
not in sheet nor in shroud we wound him ;
knocked on my sullen heart in vain ;
slippered , and with hands ,
peacefully lock'd in itself , ' neath the integument lay ,
strong - sinew'd was the youth , and big of bone ;
i used to think their slender tops
yet knew repression , could himself habituate
and the brooks of morning run .
hark ! is that a horn i hear ,
ye are rich and look big ,
who quickly gazed around to see
where poets sing the stories of our love .
oft , in a moment , snaps life 's strongest thread ,
herself and through herself of own accord ,
i said , " i toil beneath the curse ,
iii . ll . 25 - 6 , which goldsmith had in mind:--
when now the flame had come unto that point ,
since by the witness fire we met
to himself thus thought he , " what have i not to fear ?
like tones from voices of the long - ago--
one the shutters drew --
above the treetops in broceliande ,
three golden balls hang by the door ,
and lived all depths of lust . yet , oh , my god !
his all - glorious majesty , looking down upon the city of the
absence . '
than from that gnawing , was the foremost pang'd
thou shunnest to repay the debt :
oft as by winding nith , i , musing , wait
at first indeed that work divine he deemed ,
from the house like smoke departing ,
and the store clothing dummies in a flock
that ye woudna waken me out o ' my sleep
my wife grew worse in temper , worse in nerves .
an ' be getting our goods at a lower price .
or in the woods , with leafy din ,
when the great sun quivered and died to - day ,
a time , and then rose up and stood
about her training and religious life .
this clergyman some fifteen years before
the seeds of many a bloody nose ;
the word that he spoke to the pilgrim of old
then why should we sorrow -- our god is love ,
thou art , i learn , immured in close seclusion ;
and we its captives long have been ,
underneath the summer sky .
" in the most melancholy fit that ever a poor soul was , i sit
and she must know it later .
" o ye !   in chosen fellowship advanc'd
send thou thy spirit as comrade mild ,
or bright lapraik 's , my friend to be ,
and i will pledge with mine ;
comfort , and singing her
shall give hesperia peace and end her toils .
gold i have none , but i present my need ,
on the morning of the third day ,
that forthwith from the griding brass was put aback all spent ,
they are but silence .
above the long white slanting candles .
in har'st , at the shearing , nae youths now are jeering ,
the flowers , the fruit , the summer of rich life ,
they had arrived , and all was , out and in ,
the sun , who had with his resplendent shafts
thus have i seen a fond old hen
ludite : sed uigilis nolite exstinguere lychnos :
and then those ghosts that come out of their graves
than mars while fighting , or than flames that seize
and deeds of week - day holiness
make for thee the softest raiment ,
the trees . little john and scarlet appear once
had -- your reasons .
as i dwell near ; and they wanted the crosses out of sight
then i went to the heath and the wild ,
within her beams wrapping his cruel stains .
and cry'd she wrought with more almighty fire ,
of life i found me come , when each behoves
lest the night come by and by .
three hundred hath he , of one heart to wend as he shall lead :
self - torture , the unfeeling world 's annoy ,
or if thou didst , it was so long ago
at length the second night arrived ,
and nerved with any fate to cope .
on hector , and antilochus on thee
put forth thine arm , he saith ;
canto lviii . trisanku cursed .
the sixth column is mustered of bretons ;
as jacob at the bethel stone .
why should we any more be alone ?
that my submissiveness was choice :
no matter the past!--
with sated heart , he hears the pants
the wingèd words on which my soul would pierce
" so , wheresoe'er our destiny sends forth
before i stand within the awful place . "
that sche wole him abyde and se .
adorn'd in armour , and embroid'ry gay ,
six days to mammon , one to ca nt .
many 's the friend there will listen and pray
and its shivered beams in twinkling motion
which they had else forgotten here .
( all tales in time to this must come , )
of festive days and glorious nights . '
of other days around me .
behind you roars the fire , before -- the dark north sea !
before the humble cottage pray'd
accurs'd of gods and men be hateful strife
that i ne schal your wordes holde ,
( who humbly knew himself improper ,
choking down our voices as we snatch the gaskets free .
but fiercer rose his rage ; and rearing high
of ingudís from moisture freed ,
he cheer'd fair lady kriemhild long ere she look'd on thee .
at the door the ruddy brothers ,
and warm . ( i thought i heard a knock ,
even when people do sometimes say that he is coming , we no
symbol of the knowledge of good and of evil , as well as this sign
uncared for .   lydia is thirteen .
on a pyramid of embers ,
u - boat , u - boat , as you grope
lxxxiv on a favourite cat drowned in a tub of goldfishes
so in his country 's dying face
of the blacksmith , ilmarinen ,
to his charm'd heart a living picture drew ;
and lived in a cellar damp ,
this passion lifted him upon his feet ,
ah , hope not yet to breathe thy native air !
the boys flock round him , and the people stare : }
would please no reader of this tale , perhaps ;
when old - time lanes we strolled in the winter snows make white :
and clouds were swept .
and my life i 'd orter save . '
surfeit with horror .
and thou , o earth , with smiles thy face make sweet ,
at sound of the pompeian trump , return'd .
he purveyd hym~ anon~ ,
return , uninjured , to her southern bowers ;
and dwellings cluster , ' tis there men die ,
gae fa ' upo ' anither plan
is but the more a fool , the more a knave .
" all the ships that have been fashioned
and grows erect as mine comes home .
so equal justice shall be done
then with thy sultry locks all loose and rude ,
look'd at each other , as men look when truth
i had wings , set some seal
and changeful proteus , whose prophetic mind
of dusky faces ; now he shouted loud ,
just for one moment lend him me,--
forgive me ; i will speak of him no more ,
whan ye togyder lende . ’
over the archipelagoes to you ,
and sorrow no longer thy bosom enthrall .
why should we sigh
blushing through the mist and dew ,
to banish thoughts unkind away ;
on hinda 's dazzled eyes , when first
will i pause , having known thy worth ,
she breeds , with cenchri and with amphisbaena ,
material bodies ' could add speed almost spiritual . '
browny fowly ,
the fourth tilt they together rode ,
  prior 's life of malone , p. 430 . warton 's pope , vol . i. p. xlv .
" elizabeth , by the grace of god , of england , france , and ireland ,
margaretta threw herself now
i stood beside the silent , sombre river ,
singing all the music of the north .
your affectionate , and obedient servant ,
that 's a rise ! strike him sure--
but kings are not made by man ,
and some , new scotland , will be thine .
saw the rabbit in his burrow ,
the little old poem that nobody reads
and when i told them so at night
made strong to play the saner part ,
or tread instead that " primrose path " to knowledge ,
to lure her back , and fell on subtle ways
which still,--like sparkles of greek fire ,
" _ in the wide sea there lives a forlorn wretch ,
thou , juno , queen of argos , and with thee
methinks ' t was in this school of art
at dusk .   it is good
be secret and exult ,
" in thy sledge may death now enter ,
ere yet the dawn returns ,
did the liver and all the rest .
" coom , stop at yam(1 ) to - neet , bob ,
the voice to speak her free ?
his path tuv his grave were bud rough ,
which to her proper nature she transforms
so thou beholdest the contingent things
sensitive within alone ;
the chant of joy and power for boundless fertility .
on the world where they pass,--
them to slaughter and to crime .
when rallying at the call of chief ,
and pressing the small , poised feet of a mother who
out o'er the grassy lea :
too often fixing deeps of woe
unaided , through thy cursed restriction
characteristic .
against the cross , death 's iron sceptre breaks !
desire of the wave for the shore ,
that in truth you realise
to blast thy greenness , while the virgin night
in the faith that looks through death ,
you all well know i paid his bills ,
" for peace 's sake ,
from mountain cliff to rolling sea
less than the teller : only when she closed
i wish that you typewrote for me and we
you will go back directly to bow ! "
common syllabic arrangements of 11 - syllable lines :
i will not tell thee , nor my face turn round ;
and the moment she reflected ,
there for his healing cunning leeches wrought ,
june 1374 , when he was appointed controller of the customs in
laughter ringing clear
o sweet woods , the delight of solitariness !
which fill a city 's walls , when foes without
elephints a - pilin ' teak
in the first ward of darkness .   there ofttimes
but someway by random it racket ;
that didst in swimming erst contend ,
when that did not agree , he took camomile tea ,
who since he in the wooded mountain - chain
against the holy church , though he repent ,
none other my world is adorning ;
the prize we 'll yield , prove it upon record ,
of life 's and beauty 's fairest paragon
will keep the promise too .
now i begin to feel thine orby power
i will report of thee veracious news . "
no ; he 's but foreman , as he was before .
when braddock 's fall disgrac'd the mighty day ,
thereon were figur'd earth , and sky , and sea ,
that was so like a life begun ,
and i 'm sure , as here i stand ,
shake into viewless air the morning dews ,
untoucht of any , or if e'er he left it ,
but shattered on that living rock
we get there on a ' lectric car .
and win brief respite from his woes ,
where'er i turn , where'er i bend my view .
breathed some faint warbles , caught a cold , and died !
they sleep the sleep of the suns ,
couchant , and with the leash upon his neck :
and the leaves , like little ships ,
house and home , thy friends provide ;
of if by land the field you once forsake ,
true rev'rence is , as cassiodore doth prove ,
then a mourner moveth pale
pressing with thy crumpled shroud
and all the air was bitter sleet .
that pointed back to youth , this on to age ;
come , let us our rights begin ;
bound with gorgonian rigor not to move ,
vel coelites plauserint . _
beneath new heavens , where not a star we knew ,
the healthful offspring that adorn'd their house . "
that , grim and scowling :   his beard spreads
for juan wore the magisterial face
yet beauty often visits thee , and dares ,
with the angel of the lord in vain
i could not sleep . the wind poured in my ear
whatever doth his course oppose .
and see the lightning lances driven ,
we well may call you brave!--
non freta mercator tremuit , non classica miles ,
that on this holy morning comes to those
for this your names are call’d before the rest ,
bubbles of sparkling
staring so blindly !
against unequal armes to fight in paine ,
" o thou son of little insight ,
with only one _ affaire de c[oe]ur _ ,
far off , most secret , and inviolate rose ,
for me , i am the mistress of my fate ,
in this our thebes ; but when
better there in death united , than in life a recreant ,
as the great panurge in glory went
how far the sallows lean across ,
whose heads are under , from the murky jaw
into the sea among the ships .
vegetable productions , it would seem that the sugar - making
for he was walking in an april land
for fear of herod by another way .
for fear that simpson and his co. should fail .
purr , purr , purr , purr ,
a million men have found you before us . _
with his swart face all a - grin ,
in the regions that are better ,
where no one will molest us
we wandered through those walks , we ten ,
ansada ? " mirth in her two eyes ' gazelles ,
their chambers close and green .
you must travel hand in hand .
some echoes in their sleep .
with his hand he broke a fragment ,
of the next valley have had prospect good
" but why when no one wants you to go on ?
the shepherd saw a wondrous sight ;
sis ' tin - cage polly wid de roamin ' nose
brings the daring lemminkainen ,
" my rival ! " shrieked the invalid ,
thou in a thousand sev'ral forms are drest ,
it gave life new rapture and love a new birth .
light of the human race !
by the disaster that befel our beau .
in a state forlorn .
and smashed , to cleanse the world of guilt .
o ’ purse - proud men !
dark as huge clouds before they burst .
of the prince 's pavilion in sweet pimlico .
in patient silence hopefully withdrawn ,
where apollo spoke of old .
i should like to rise and go
charm me some rare anointment i may trust
i will dare whatever danger
cauld is the e'enin blast ,
while fum deals in mandarins bonzes , bohea ,
nursing the sickly babe , her latest - born .
and no more :
made a great noise ; and the shocking fatality ,
so moved the greeks successive , rank by rank ,
and theirs were happy sleigh - ride winters ,
like this last , dim , weird battle of the west .
and where he might bestow it safe
on the river rhine ,
in hymns of triumph to the god
et nilo pygmaea grues post bella remenso
ah , me ! how my spirit was stirred !
a comrade who was under the influence of drink ,
some long - desired thing denied .
as if through a dungeon - grate he peered
and one peculiar nation to select
she entered softly , and with trembling hands
bengala 's plains are richly green ,
i had already fixed mine eyes on his ,
vhen breitmann enter dere .
her tender mind , with meek religion fraught ,
so to me and my lesbians round me gathered ,
to slice the humming deal ,
winter doth his theme retrace
their passage to the acherusian lake ,
one makes his vessel new , and one recaulks
were fixed with wonder and surprise
once the tiger - lily 's pride ,
with the bright and silv'ry flood
god grant that it may lighten up with joy when i draw nigh ;
such as within that vale never before
adam , from whose deare side i boast me sprung ,
or if the rouen folk can keep their chain ,
a new return of life , whose custom ' tis
late in the night when the fires are out ,
grant us but one to strike
by passions fierce , propensities depraved ,
the rose is red , the violet blue ,
i 'd get full measure of the joy that boyhood
if aught unto the sight brief pleasure gives ,
and flourishes his empty sword in air .
and round that neck entwine her !
the clay - cold brow undecked in life .
or praise malignly arts i can not reach ,
and see , that light has gilded
  yuen - men said to meng ch'ang - chuen ( died 279 b.c . ) , " does it not
then glaucus ' form unchang'd , was yet unknown .
ah , then cry out for that lost , lovely rose ,
waits for the holy hands that took
and the fruiting and the harvest home ,
should flowers affray nor fowls upon the fold .
blooming flower and a tiny bud .
shrill and more shrill the popinjay
and she was there , my hope , my joy ,
strong may thy heart in danger be !
and share the wine and bouillabaisse .
the stars had feelings , which they sent
the eerie shadows play in elvish glee .
hath taken ; whence i wand'ring by the shore
and there 's bucky would burn like a barrel of bub .
there she rocked the glowing brightness ,
where daisies open'd to the sun ,
the host bade to the strangers / in fitting way be shown ,
know ye that the day is nearing
rather to mourn his son 's dissevered head ,
at study , work , or play,--
locked anguish of laocoons that gripped
no , no , bonnie steed , i will not part with you .
ah , little muse still far too high
thy ancient fame is growing dim ,
of other ages that are still to be
lolah demanded the new damsel 's name--
tore it from its deep foundation ,
in mortals , for the cause ye well discern ,
an ' i rid ' i m to school ;
when battles rage .
stephen 's lips were twitching with suppressed amusement .
and my soul soars on its wings
close the doors against him firmly . "
of a right handsome gall , well rigg'd , now that 's my taste .
inexplicable changes that marriage has wrought for her -- on her
my firstborn .   last published in 1878 , omitted in 1868 .
and as i played , a child came thro ' the gate ,
it quickly comes and quickly goes --
we lay in living ruins ; firing and fearing not
soliciting with tears that he , who is ,
an ' flour to bak i ' t ' yoon.(4 )
literature , the early saturnian verses , written in free rhythms ,
all thou art and hast to - day : "
the lord of all , himself through all diffused
but alas ! for the things that we hope to do !
and the willeby - wat :
but teach her that each mortal simply needs
beheld , the mightier for those heavier hours
within the tunnel working in a drift ,
it 's glory -- but , in spite o ' all my tryin to git callous ,
but oh ! that awful coming day ,
myself unseen , i see in white defined
by rules of love ,
dawn had no breeze soft as her murmured name ?
my worthy friend , a. gordon knott ,
could a prettier picture be seen ?
as the springs to meet the sunshine ,
powdered periwigs .
and careless to be seen .
trembled with color of the poppy blooms
creech , at the beginning of his lucretius :
" but the words were heard by hiisi ,
from face of heauenly fires , could ought preuaile
doubtful at first , and gravely yet awhile ;
is it a dream ?
basin of the danube , and extending from the adriatic to the black
quit of belongings . in a fair , still spot
stood hewn and limn'd upon the stone .
by fire of wrath .
poland , in years that sound and shine afar ;
i will no longer look or think ,
feel that love is only duty ,
few half so happy as i seemed ,
who hath , like me , long exiled from his home
alex .       no , whilst light raigns , lucasta still rules here ,
his dismal throne to share .
harassed yet watchful of their costly bales--
much briefly conteyneth four vertues cardinall ,
circle in dance around the altar fair ;
and when those legislators fight ,
the green silence dost displace
the seventh , another poetical dispute , first composed at mantua .
madeline.--_a legend of the mohawk._--the events narrated in
and the jack - ass 's load was light - en - ed full soon .
whereon would europe 's master somewhiles doat ,
account of cotton mills
is in thy mouth and heart ,
and not one of all these foemen
to have his praise was like a wound ,
from year to year the signs of wrath
and all beset with flowers .
" hic silvestris erat romani nominis altrix
tha tuke her hand ;
y zaida á le despedir ,
and all the study of mankind is man.--warburton .
or thraldom , though he fele in it distresse ,
ask blessing , babe , be not afraid ,
that hath for confine only light and love ,
cognovit bos et asinus
that love is dead ?
tumultuous,--and , in chords that tenderest be ,
grand and mighty the procession !
of discipline lay on him .
welcome , folded arms and fixéd eyes ,
in a very lowly station ,
before the april night was late
like rushing thunderbolts they sped ,
eaten the sour bread of astonishment ,
debarred from the gate who the truth should deny ,
for the bird was truth .
and from th ' impending curse a pious people free ! '
by pools and dusky closes
as it fell upon a day
the west was cloudless while the sun went down ,
which in high hearts is quickly quieted ,
" now tarry still , sir hagen ; / why so dost haste away ?
princes afore - named , old and young foresaid ,
" first page -- the hod[vz]a is going to marry !
that soar , to earth may fall
on her own blood ; and blamed her joy as thief
' twas five years ago come chrismus , maybe you remember the row ,
inculcate moral and religious truths on all occasions where an
strong in the charm the fairy gave the child .
’ tis ours , the chance of fighting fields to try ;
and gird them to the accomplishment ; so i
the dream 's at an end -- the delusion is done .
to m ' sarah , m ' deary , of course i alluded ,
and great hosts of valiant people
beheld the queen and lancelot get to horse .
and idle thoughts eschew .
whose neck is narrow and whose swell is wide ;
come , spur away ,
that haunts the farmer 's look abroad ,
to the same effect is his statement in ` the english novel ' :
together at a banquet .   but agamemnon was glad when he heard his
the peer of vishṇu ’s power and might ,
breaks a ' thegither .
selected by the chair ; the chair himself
beneath his jockey 's feather - weight
my thought an outline still caresses ,
the man taught his wife ;
lay on the walls of those staunch dardan men .
in memory 's twilight beauty seen afar :
her first - born 's bridal with the haggard deep ,
all escape cut off by the sea , and the sentinels near them ,
that beverage , with whose sweetness i had ne'er
and not my hand that flavored every dish
with malice filled , about my love ,
you not a reminiscence of the land alone ,
and men fling themselves down forgetting their troubles ,
to wife nor lady shalt thou ever boast
her , and the one who will make her the most advantageous offer ;
white flake of childhood , clinging so
give me , give me rest , oh rest !
are thy own children , thou hast borne them all .
let me work now ; i may do something yet .
the courtiers buzz , " lo , doomed ! " and look at him askance:-
all is decreed . at yonder southern gate
' i m an ' ' is cobber , called mick curio ,
round mountain - caverns with spirits hover ,
gradasso that he would , in courteous way ,
getting their suppers , and the slayer of argus threw them all
and rid sole sovereign o'er his flood ,
from angad ’s hand was fiercely thrown ;
so they sat down and chatted with laughter and jest ;
well might a lover all her love excuse .
quosque secans infaustum interluit allia nomen(512 ) ;
his hoary curls th ' indignant hero shakes ,
round a bright isle , set in a sea of gloom ,
i wondered if mountain lion were on the water
he schal de - clar hit also , as hit on clay stande . ”
trasches = trauses or trossers , drawers or trousers ? b. 40 .
that glanced from him far off to shine
shot the deer and trapped the beaver ;
her looks , her words , the pleasing song she sung--
and the night with her spread wings rustling
through distant age ; saints travell'd ; martyrs bled ;
then poems two , at each upward flight ,
both di'd alike , both pierc'd their tender breasts ,
she of frontino first and rodomont ,
who flyes , still heares it whisking at his heeles .
utterly lost and defenceless ,
to strike him . "   then to me my guide : " o thou !
but when bells at midnight sound
how oft with a pleasure akin to a pain ,
with the immortal olive that circles bold galileo 's
my hopes are crost , my lover lost ,
and authors think their reputation safe ,
this was our house .   in this we knew
so surely it were wise and good
near a beauty , joyous be . since the end of things in this
when the dark hour of death is near .
which she will see no more !
shod their brown feet ; hair shorn ; lids low , to think--
oh ! the little fairies ,
but tickling 's a luxury:- love , indeed !
lady mine ,
though serfdom 's sad conditions left behind ,
wid a fancy purtition betwane our two pigs ! "
  the leaves of the willow , though green above , are hoar below .
so walked the dead and i together
their several sides and went into battle . juno , pallas minerva ,
talk of the sun and stars and gentle moon ,
though the seasons of man full of losses
not a farewell spoken ,
they do not care to ride
aneath the greenwood tree ,
and to that vois an ere he leide
be thy remembrance mortal of our sin :
they 'll range those hills and vallies o'er ,
too strong for the hands of a man to dissever or fire to consume ;
rash mortal , and slanderous poet , thy name
with great judgement . it may be considered as superior to
who out of smallest things could , without end ,
for whom the glorious thunderer mingles both ,
the wild winds sobbing blow ,
and he has proved the ancient saw
and then , with piercing woe distressed ,
so freely that such bounty / ne'er before was seen .
and iris - crowned with radiating pride ,
with black they encircled each eye ,
fearing to break the glint of gold
the rose of love shall bide alway
cumberland , where the estate of his father - in - law ( sir lancelot
' what can i do , ' asked howard fry ,
and the rude voices touched with all the weathers
and heaven refus'd him ,
ennobler of thy nature , so advanc'd
schalt þow schortly al schende & schape non oþ{er } . ”
but mrs . earth can change my dreams
thus miserably o'erwhelm us .   i beheld
he gains all points , who pleasingly confounds ,
such as , late or soon , dust yields ;
the danger was now over .   god was kind ;
looking at me , at my mother with me
lop overgrown , or prune , or prop , or bind ,
that thei the juggement devise ,
that purity whose fading is love 's death!--
amang the hungry worms i sleep .
with rattling kernels , which is rung
as in frolic chase ,
not conquered -- for , behold , we reign ;
meadow - flowers , and lightly lingered with the dew .
towards her lover .   now astonished i
for they are lyke but unto golden hookes ,
her haffet locks as brown 's a berry ;
with all men 's gaze upon her ,
farewell , farewell ! but this i tell
lak de dead she lay ,
up and down and back we went , never time for breath ;
in mouth and palate too . thus some must be
you still are golden - gay ,
behold villario 's ten years ' toil complete :
written long after chen 's death
beloved france ! how have the good and brave
how sweet and consoling the true shepherd 's voice !
this said , from young rinaldo 's angry eyes ,
must sweeten my revenge . ah , i would see
at paradise ( seat of our ancient sire )
to the divine delight which shone upon me
boyhood sad is merging
doreen , she ' as ' er sewin ' be the fire ,
the natur of this court
ode to evening , by the same
with unshod feet , with brows unchapleted .
hell is the place where whipping - cheer abounds , ii . 214 .
and when she couldna stray out by ,
newly their mother 's history , unthought
i dwell , who recompenseth every wrong . "
of equal ; seeing either sex alone
his freight of petty misery ;
struggle with their thongs of deer - skin ,
thou false mistress of man ! thou dost sport with him lightly
of sterres hath his pourpartie :
who , when they 're assailed by thirst ,
that lookst on this and doth endure so long . "
of trackless plains , and mountains , and the indian 's
boast not your incomes now , as heretofore ,
i beg you would this night equip with speed ,
onely omniscient , hath supprest in night ,
for ever slaves at home and fools abroad . '
to bob and sue , who have ice - cream ,
come sail across the raging main with me ! "
from hill to cloudy hill .
and sing my simple lay ,
undeformed by wasting sickness . "
far - flowing mighty rivers were dried up :
a barren heifer , proserpine , to thee ,
" for oath that thou wilt never reign
where seem'd my ken to fail , that the mid orb
for in this weak , unarméd wise
is here beside me , night an ' day ;
what tongue that night of havoc can make known
to each most antique habitant
broad boughs of the old - world tree ,
until he found a palpitating snake ,
what we so tried from conscience to conceal .
wrong with new wrong , but right with right ;
or sympathie , or som connatural force
me with indignity within these walls ,
some twenty years ago .   as i was standing
by the revolution 's dead ,
now sees , unlooked for , heaven on earth ,
as the widow 's black eyes on the strangers are glancing .
i wolde assaie , hou so it falle ,
as forms that glide through elfheim 's limber air ;
to earth he will tread thee ,
if boas will bolt blankets , boas must :
this verdant field that smiles to heaven
had left behind by accident ;
fair beaming , and streaming ,
" _ he 'd never seen so many dead before . _ "
the steeds which bear me were my godlike sire 's ;
of the three hundred grant but three
splendour
' twill smiling gaze ,
why does he seek to fix a quarrel on me ?
make heavenly trespass;--ay , press in
foreshadow of the future,--for full well
where day and night the holy voices rise
is he not such an one as moves to mirth--
worldely goodis he left ther yn~ ,
as her fine sleeves rubbed against them ,
the church where we were we d , mary ,
issued at noon upon a beach , that lay
orgulloso y satisfecho ,
the willow - tree ( another version )
and the dews upon the grass are made diamonds by the sun ,
still threatening with his arrows keen ;
longer than i can backward date .
we prayed and hoped ; but still , with awe ,
an ’ back to t’station we did steer ,
the poles whirl round with swifter motion ,
insensate taxed ; of his impenitent will ,
and takes the great aeneas and his guide .
this land that reared me is my dearest love ,
eyes too expressive to be blue ,
its winged seed dropped down from paradise ,
behind the great god 's spheres ;
these tufted branches fair
save what the glimmering of these livid flames
and with an hundred deaths revenged one fall .
i tell you , give them more , still more , ' tis all i ask ,
on the blank ruin writes ' forbear !
you stood by pasture - bars to give the cows good milking ,
( ll . 2485 - 2499 ) then , as i have heard , the heathen leaders laid
assured no foes dare lurk , no dangers lie
singing soft and low .
as indra ’s self , o’er earth had spread ;
for whom i felt great respect .   we used to sit and gaze at each
that father , in reverie centr’d ,
my vellum - backed vondel ,
their power abused ! that power may soon descend :
when i , from all these things emancipate ,
with antique sinew and with modern art .
baron stork , in a waltz , was allowed to excel ,
clear , broad , white forehead , crowned low down with hair
affronting witches incense burn ;
to aid , and stretched his swordless hand unto the fallen man ,
and fair of the folk .      the father they thanked
and metamorphize her conceaued spight
' ancestor ' , just as uta means ' ancestress ' .   in the
" i 'll vouch for some two hundred catholic throats
who yet unborn
be touch'd by suffering humankind .
stamping flint feet , flashing moon eyes ,
indignant at the fumbling wits , the obscure spite
and of whose envying so much woe hath sprung ,
join battle , man to man , and arms to arms !
bats and bowls and maypole dancing .
seraph of love ! in heaven 's adoring zone ,
or slice , or hack , they all were there .
the wind that through the pine trees sung
of silence -- sings until the walls resound
come away , come away !
he writes that he is coming down to see us .
thy mother is shaking the dreamland tree ,
and teazed and puzzled simple men
because they coruscate when thou dost smile ,
for one word is the tale of men :
and when he arose , lo ! his stylish clothes
_ session - house , within the kirk of canongate , the
the war - steed 's wakening ears!--
of a clime of flowers ;
yet the sea is not the end ,
thou drownest nature 's sweet and kindly voices ,
" a foretaste of the full beatitude ,
whirling his bloody brand , nor grants he grace ,
fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
a little lyric that had the power
there is a hidden logic . even the rhyme
with ingenuity divine contrived
an coud maintain a lady free ? "
is more than i know -- the deuce take them both !
and it was whispered that there was a chance
won by her prayer , the aerial bridegroom flies ,
my people in sun - haunted nooks
relax the iron hand of pride ,
at first he thought it rather odd ,
for ever , like a vain star , unafraid
in his breathlessness , above thrust , is as earth to helios .
the blue birds hung over in ecstasy tender ,
the faint and fragile petals--
the apple bee with buzzing sound .
weepe 'cause i can weepe no more .
ah , it 's coming ! now she founders !
because thou hast set thine heart to sing , and sold
lo ! he looks back from the departing cloud .
but , from that hour , ah well , we 'll say no more . "
no pampered bloom of the green - house chamber
in my throat are iron - clinkers .
shout upon the trojans , and thrice did he kill nine men ; but as
and even touched the gold cloth where her feet
because awaiting us would be somebody that we know .
no care he had the ancient bounds to change ,
and grieved her friends by this :
was my life also ; i went hunting wild
that i heard this nice reverend o'_something _ we 've here ,
a flying word from here and there
of deathless inspiration , that may flow
while honour , hand - maid , late assign'd ,
as yet in their astonied hearing rung
then up sprang orrin with a bound ,
there sweet contentment builds her nest ,
who wast thou , and why are your backs turned upwards ,
' tis but rain , and runs not clear .
profane the maiden 's face ;
sure token from thy lord the king :
" i ca n't , " the child replied ,
our knowledge , and the scale of nature set
nicht ein lüftchen hörst du wallen ,
why things are as they are , nor gods nor men
_ joy above wealth _ .
made the fence without a pass - way ,
would n't , though ask'd continyally , own their wicked plan--
i saw but them -- they were the world to me !
this worthi poeple to beguile ,
a stranger and the winter , hand in hand ,
since his country is saved forever !
in spring , with curus heats an ' prickly pains ,
you 're young and you 're brave and you 're bright .
the lightning ,
though we name no leading jurist :
" say , policeman , tell me truly that this young man you did see ,
but , jist as sudden , they all stop an ' stare
but dressing , patching , repartee ;
ambrosia                               _ love returned . _
fourth in order antilochus , son to noble nestor son of neleus ,
give me this once thy labor , to sustain
without the cost of some repentant tear . "
be evil fate thy mother ’s doom !
of whose life and death is none
whence was formed his hide so shaggy ,
i , liberated , look abroad on life ,
afterwards into an ode disgraceful only to its author .
she sobbed , as she answered , " all liquors
putnam 's brave troops , your honor would have swore ,
the mist that is fine like lawn ,
steps on the sad marge of acheron . " then with eyes bashful and
given , though somewhat homely , is extremely natural , and , as
but still the faster on they go ,
for me and mine , a trusty guide .
then there are those the scapular bedights ,
athena visited on his hapless sons .
the author of " woodnotes of a wanderer , " john ramsay , was born at
one mound they swiftly heaped above these twain .
where the bounds of black death be ,
i would my soul might reason then with thine ,
some vengeance due , with lightning 's force
four days are sped , but with the fifth , anon ,
soul touching soul , trust from distrust were won ,
the daffodilies at me smile ;
the secret virtue of each herb that springs ,
the line where earth and ocean meet ;
from the woods he brought the pheasant ,
' ich habe unter meinen papieren ein blatt gefunden ,
forth from her land to mine she goes ,
when teeth are here , you 'll meet the dentist 's chair ;
( arthur o'shaughnessy : _ the fountain of tears . _ 1870 . )
the tempest blattered .
and for what cause in durance they abide .
that neither history nor song
while some repeat
also nosola , between taprobana ( the modern ceylon ) and the coast
the folly of love 's sacrifices .
here the members who are crafty
how much would novels gain by the exchange !
ask the stranger in my halls for tidings of my lord ; for i
who wrongs another , the remembered meed
but do not see them .
_ news of her spaniel . _ jolicoeur . "
this was the medicine -- the patients ' woes soon ended ,
ach ! ve could knock dem -- pouf ! like dot ,
blackened the skies , then splitting , ripped and tore
as the baying of wolves from afar ,
a gardenful of poems none did sow,--
for light , i am not , i , the first or last .
and she began , lighting me with a smile
confederation you did crown ;
glorious above his head , and spoke :
how beautiful is the battle ,
& godde glydeȝ his gate by þose grene wayeȝ
with a gay lady .
i heard her breathe my name .
and thought on shrines all voiceless now and bare ,
lurking by the lakes and rivers
far differing from this world , thou hast revealed ,
ding - dong - bell , the cat 's in the well .
diligently polished . there is not one which is not remarkable for
the rose and jessamine , leaps wild in thee !
'cause baseball is crooked , anyway ! "
of what i 've felt in this bright place .
here the music of prayer from a minaret swells ,
it would be very nice ;
ere the wit that made you win gives you eyes to see your sin
so i have fared through many suns ;
there is an air about you like the air
wherewith to bind him at the midnight hour ,
distinct , but distant -- clear -- but oh ! how cold !
teach me to live ! ' tis easier far to die--
with sir thomas percy , afterwards earl of worcester , for the
was visible : the tail disparted took
though the hot blood ran boiling in her brain ,
oblivion it may be -- but give me music !
on it there 's no relying :
beneath whose rocks the furtive crawfish hides
broke not the holy idols of the temples !
but no!--they rubb'd through yesterday
and rosy shall sit on the gold ;
and i have ears to hear what you say ;
so , since we communed here , our bones have been
this little stream whose hamlets scarce have names ,
but in our saviour 's suffering share .
thou hast constrained mine eyes , unholy death ,
oh ! you should have seen him shiver
two hundred to adore each breast ,
the temporal and eternal , thou hast seen ,
must set a lock upon his lips ,
majestic with long fall of cloud - white beard ,
his funeral - stone with honour she should raise .
dry your tears and cease to sigh , keep your mother smile ,
the mountain rolled the echoing sound .
o'er many a country , many a classic land !
this i forgot last night :
an alien tongue .
and the sun did shine so cold . "
wherein you all consent and all agree .
and never speaks his mind save housed as now :
to be his hostage .   if thou place me there ,
the case is too plain , that if i stay here
quando ullam inveniam parem .
shun the kingdom of tuoui ! "
that she was nere hond wood .
and again the woman began
' my girl , ' quoth she , ' on what occasion break
to take up the sugar
tell me , where did i make that break ?
be in us patience -- neither to start nor cower .
and shivering in my nakedness ,
to sit and dream in a shady nook
and home at night to stitch .
the hoary king , his old sicilian maid
the symbol of her life and fate . for first
beholding , whence his wonder riseth , cries
girlish bust , but womanly air ;
" ah , cruel sea , " and , looking on't ,
next , camus , reverend sire , went footing slow ,
to set the world a - wooing .
where lodg'd , or whither fled , or if for fight ,
once again to life and vigour .
and the winter constellations that are like patient ox - eyes
where he climbed as dusk embrowned ,
then anger fill'd the heart of ocean 's king ,
where concord fleets there plenty will decease ,
so uncontrolled it came to be ,
till full he dashes on the rocky mounds ,
that he was wretched poor .
an ' never bothered what you might ha ' done .
upon the youngest mule .
who seems no bolder than a beaten hound ;
the watching smile , as death breathes on me his cold sleep .
of luxury and commerce , to the flames
is veil'd by others ' beams . "   i said , and turn'd
i reached my hand down for it and it stopped .
another mystery .   tell him , if the light ,
as the melody fittest for love .
in fruitless search a while they gazed .
the night comes to me , but my rest it is gane ;
and wept at noontide , wept at dewy eve ,
and with the flowers she comes again .
adown the breathing tresses of the flow'r
ever when the trembling
" tell me what will you do ?   why would you stain
while , musing on her new - come guests , the queen ,
bedad i can not pass it o'er :
plows up fields of corn and barley ,
and rendered us , by sorrow 's ties ,
our constant consoler , he never grew weary ;
though sad and wild it be :
in the stable of my father ;
the turquoise sky to burnished gold was turned .
mas ¡ ay ! que la busca en vano ;
with beauteous eyes , and richly flowing curls ;
lest the berries be ungathered ,
where woman , though delightful still ,
from thee among the haunts of men ,
the peaceful seas two lovely sisters bore .
_ good - nights _ , long said , yet never said ,
it was cushioned with silk , it was wadded with hair ,
by yan another o ' their awwn good land .
da schimpften die beiden unflaethig .
piecemeal disparts .   howling there spread , as curs ,
and i waste in the wood unknown ! "
and scorn the guidance of a vulgar hand ;
fighting in lonely pride ,
so white that no snow reaches that extreme . when they descended
this is the tale of the man
it was in the first editions :
" no tax , " said he , " wherever i look . "
and sodeinly the nyhtes tyde ,
it wastes not in the fire thou keep'st alive ?
in the remainder of that hymn is writ .
o to give o'er endeavor
" this ensign , rimedon , i gave not thee
the leader , under whom on manna fed
do the vanish'd days forget ?
think'st thou the warbling muses never smiled
all friendship fly thy faithless side ;
bigots blame me in their wrath .
lest his fasting should be fatal .
narisonance .
high raises his cabar on .
therefore advises to call in still more helps :
you know i was zealous for george 's command ,
and there was an ugly hole in the wall--
almonio sends , and many matters shews ,
adown the ages there have come the sounds of that first singing ,
" the star ! behold the star , " they shout ;
and steeds and store of silver , and so their wants supplied ,
nixie ! i 'm not canned chicken till i 'm cooked ,
who had by haughty custom grown
all gracious curves of slender wings ,
duteous before the altar standing ,
the turtles sigh'd , and sighs with kisses broke ,
old ocean , glittering in the beams of morn ,
their altars by his altar , gods ador'd
my soul !
not you , not i.
she broke and cleft the crown , and caused him veil
and drove his brows into his head for the bone was smashed , and
hold us .   always there is strangely mingled , but
is all the noise the spring encounters now .
and near and nearer draw .
i knew one hour of terror ( on the day
merchant , you who drink your mead
to - day you clasp the hands that ache
inque sinus niveos pergeret , ore pari ;
as she approached the open grave ;
now have i tasted bread , now ruddy wine
with the most mighty realm that ever stood .
" i 'm afraid you are , " miss pamela assented , gloomily . " i 'm an old
unknown to him to guide thee here . "
sheepish he doffs his hat , and mumbling swears
nor spares the hand
and follow my true love for ever mair . "
for wherever they 're lying , in cupboard or shelf ,
the lovely maiden mov'd her on , and call'd
broad - shouldered little slabs there in the sunlight
all the limits of legitimate burlesque ,
twines over clustering ivy - berries pale .
' and people have an awful down
where low the reed - grass lay ,
i pray you know , though he want his bow ,
is holy over all .
our shed at night to rear ;
of one , whose spirit , on high musings bent ,
thousands whom high heaven foredooms
and to exhibit it impaled on high .
if they will leave the land to me ,
ages long the battle lasted--
the myrrh , the incense with so sweet odour ;
who every foe in fight o’erthrew ,
of its waters deep ;
( and every voice she talked with ratify it ,
is that a tapping -- soft and low ?
come tell me the reason , i pray .
below the hill , and walk'd the rest .
of the bangles round thy feet ;
nondum expiatis uncta cruoribus ,
with happy throngs and banners gay .
that i shall never find him !
but blacksmith soon did it repair
to take the sacrament with all our men ,
and one it may be a queen .
up from the prairie the tanned herdsmen pass
and hurricanes howl ,
for the king ’s son , that sacred juice .
like some wood - fiend that frights benighted men ,
must in shame henceforth eschew .
two measures of millet he gets for the whole ;
to a friend whose work has come to nothing
iris all hues , roses , and jessamine ,
it were so ! since surely it must be ; for the more it will weigh
nor by the punic victor was he taught ,
what spirit the sweets of his eden would miss ?
who sat at the feet of the lord of the scyldings ,
and softly part his curtains to allow
amid a hermit band ,
i have discover'd to thee , yet behooves
the holy peace that fills the air
o'er wastes of frozen snow .
above .   he cried aloud , " he was my brother .
he had two paws , hairy to the armpits ; his back and breast and
what other man his thonk deserve ,
host toward host with full collected force
and yaf unto his poeple a weie ,
in his distended paws to grasp the prey .
between their footsteps and mine own was fain
hunc siquidem amplexu semper reuocante tenebas
shall dawn upon him desolate ! )
and let the day be time enough to mourn
v. 108 .   the queen . ]   the virgin mary .
without a risk to run of either sort ?
all felt the worship , all confessed the god ,
books were sold . the cobwebs were kindred to the works of these
he held the human race in scorn ,
ye leaders of the well - appointed greeks ,
he 's fleech'd ye out o ' a ' ye hae ,
for why ? my skill and strength are such
" bring , o raven , bring my tear - drops
" by thy long grey beard and glittering eye ,
nay , deem not thus,--no earthborn will
in our eternity of sober loneliness .
thy flame shall light the page refined ,
kindly deceiv'd by thy disdain ,
or why a star dropp'd in the west
then when i am thy captive talk of chaines ,
that which wrought on thee ,
shines out to light them on their way unto the bygone land ,
and was i to learn _ him _ now which side to take of an island
made sweeter , not made dim ,
and looks to meet the placid stare
and i : " good leader , i but keep concealed
and have my selfe oftentimes sore abused
--niversity of gottingen .
bud dons a bonnet atstead,(1 )
lest arms avenge the violated peace . "
thou knowest the walls , altar and hour and night :
like better to pronounce it down this way . "
to stretch mac swiggen floundering on the field ,
and when he hears the wild , untutored note
came full to life ; the rain
but to make the invidious election,--
while serve as angels the unwedded ones ,
your heat , " says south , " ' tis now too late ;
a cloud lay cradled near the setting sun ,
above the shadowy world ,
like some pure thought , by unknown lips let fall ,
and wrapped in shining blue , and emerald green ;
by which to sing forth their pythonick fits .
would wither in the sun .
and depths of smiling blue .
the fleet foot on the sill of shade ,
the blue was the blue of june ,
or what fond beggar , but to touch the crown ,
the beautiful sad woman come with him ,
“ he bore their appellations . when matur'd
nearer now than e'er of old .
so in my sight he makes me prize him well ;
assiduous wait upon her ;
ausschwebst , um sie am ew'gen born
against the painted wall . my heart threw wide
love woos her in the summer wind ,
the soul of you , its human tenderness ,
if jove be present and assist our fleet ,
of slouthe , as thou hast herd devise .
what leaping eyeballs!--beauty dashed
hides while yet he can ;
for now i know that they alone
but soareth high , as if to catch a starre ;
elsewhere silence , or near or far--
were less to merlin , who had made him king ,
can yield the senseless marble ; but the soul
' twas but to bless these hours of shade
slow winged her way sublime , and mingled with the morn .
they bind his hands and feet and there ,
will . i am in great want , but i will not take anything at all
for mantua 's noble duke the foe shall stay ,
my saul , than thy brethren taller and fairer ,
mid the mountaineers of lapland ,
and my white - crested helmet , like a tombstone !
vex not thy soul with dead philosophy ,
i saw her one morning attempting to throw
they drift through opalescent ocean caves ,
he wha grasps thy little hand
and cast a large libation on the ground ;
whose pale - fac'd inconsiderable band
then the old man turn'd up , and a fresh bite of sancho 's
was table , table - cloth and fare ;
that lips could speak thy heart could muve .
red with the blood of priam ; he hath slain
" ' why , mortal , wanderest thou from cheerful day ,
across the schoolboy 's brain ;
the scream of filthy caesars stabbed high in their brazen halls ,
how nice the lady was and how she talked ,
the craik amang the claver hay ,
nor know the mystic bands which bind ,
on his courser 's mane let the bridle flow ;
but his measures were discordant ,
amid the frog - like errors from the damp
robbed the infant of her mother .
first comes captain robert collier ;
his deathbed song , in view of yonder heaven
tra la , tra la , la , la , la,--who
say , shall we yield him , in costly devotion ,
or britain 's still unconquer'd shores ?
if jonson 's learned sock be on ,
and his mother watched him hang for the felony .
as rhymes direct the rage of art .
lxvi . down drops the beast , and on the earth lies low ,
of snow upon the mountains and the moors--
yet , sir , though fortune frown'd when i was born ,
you go on with the bot - tle and bag ,
and the grandeur that was rome .
a worthi king in his degre :
though hearts were crushed and drunkards
make of these prayers of earth ever new flowers ;
and sands unnumbered lie ; while days and nights and sun
she kils , but ere we feele the smart .
but he must go by fort bukloh to his own place to fare ,
for to exclude the hated leo bent ,
lo , thus he was enformed there :
kept pace with pure devotion , noble work
this sewing and this caring for the children
a king might wish to hold in fee .
his courage thirsted yet more blood to spill ,
is marching in that caravan .
of the treacherous austrian gun,--
swift comes thy destiny as thou hast said ,
found the all - seeing son of saturn with the blessed gods that
the imperial race we are .
and then , at the moment when things are askew ,
by many a year the writing play'd me false .
thou canst not be , ere thou once more behold
the mother - hands no further toil may know ;
captive led by beauty 's power ,
for i -- love you , my husband ! "
who weds a woman links arms with care .
by his power of observation
nor does he seem to rate me higher
six hundred men , or more , we here attend ,
( or in portland , perhaps ; i 've forgotten ) ;
a staunch conviction nothing shakes
let us exult in hope , that all shall yet be well .
i turned from all she brought to those she could not bring .
but villians who , if all were just ,
they 're fairly abreast to an inch .
quite near .
inviolate silence , earless , unawaking
he ’s daan abaat th ’ paper mill brig .
" ba , ba ! " " caw , caw ! " cry bird and beast .
speech when they had kissed your face ,
" juno , restrain thy wrath ; they shall not both
though his lines are none too level ,
fear the just gods , and think of scylla 's fate !
he rode all unarmed , and he rode all alone .
the sapless foliage of the ocean , know
this prefatory remark , that mr . sawin , though a native of
whilome , said she , before the world was civill ,
like phoebus , when he bends to cast
_ versos anacreónticos _ . the name _ endecha _ is given to
revisit , nor put out to open sea ,
that rustles forest leaves , that sweeps the fields ,
soon their intangible track will be run ,
forgetting , and i have grown
that took me hence ) and with that memory
seasons impair'd not the ray
she gallant pheres and famed aeson bred ;
--when pride and greatness had not swell'd the stage
the fetters of the slaves .
of ocean for her own domain .
while the tempest raged and thundered ,
for ever list'ning to the tongue         }
" our old house looks so solid ,
to a golden bourne in the west ,
she woke but could not turn in bed ,
how beggarly appear arguments before a defiant deed !
i must pass from thy face , i must pass from the face of the sun :
that other time , when tipped up by a squall ) .
what ! is it not enough ?   would you hear more ?
from out this dainty , crimson flow'r ,
right hand that they might make a drink - offering before they set
they fled like ghosts before the day !
this , the origin of iron ,
he has opened his mouth to the north and the south ,
he saw the splendor of the sky
while ancient phylas , cherishing her boy
famous for the miller 's daughter ,
mi única patria la mar .
on the plains ,
whose names , whose deeds , are quite forgot :
tetzel the monk , with fiery glow ,
i need no trust in borrowed spars ;
and they wake into a light ,
whose conduct was strange and unmannerly ;
for mine own part , i 'd as lief
o poesy , fine sprite ! i 'd bless thee more
for peals of ethereal minstrelsy there .
all the rest have thirty - one ,
heigh ho ! to sleep i vainly try ;
renounce black devils to adopt the blue ,
sid has the secret , chartres
of merry notes , and drew it back afresh
he is alive or dead , and there is no use in idle conversation . "
but did i say she equall'd you ?
the supercilious cheechako might designate them high ,
so i the sixth part ' mong such genius played .
  when _ james _ the _ first _ , at great _ britannia _ 's helm ,
so he was faine ( when he would haue some play )
into the heaven of heavens .   thou com'st , indeed ,
and sold my reputation for a song .
is abbot of the college , say to him
wants to play .
but in his dreams her form to see ,
led by the wandering light ,
thank god for all respite from weary toiling ,
make up for the lost music , when your teams
between our thirsty spear - heads and our foes .
he blew a great blast and the thread was gone ;
the smell of blood , and human sacrifice .
a feast proportion'd to their crimes decreed ;
it will point to the hidden spring ;
broke the colored bow of ukko ,
eyes front , head high to the finish .
sweet thyrsis sweetly played ,
on lengh{e } i loked to hyr þere ,
skilled in all weapon ’s lore and use
decreta vulgi , non popularia
and my songs,--green leaves and blossoms,--
" i speak this unto your shame . "
bulged , exuded from the earth ;
my shame is gone , and that which was my heavenward road to be .
thus entering , in the glittering rooms he found
shall that bold race no more thy care engage ,
et fulgore nitet collato clarior orbis ?
and here , man , here 's the wreath i 've made :
when the great assembly lodge
funditur , & vastos umbo vomit aureus ignes , _ & c.
grant me with those two remaining .
everybody knows that ? yes , it 's certain they do ,
this above all : to thine own self be true ;
above all seasons with their fitful grace ;
for the kingly heads that bowed not down
now , i would hope sweet blessings may
but sool as i by prayers begil ,
account mee man ; i for his sake will leave
as other towns have done . "
soon as he reached the saint most bright
o ye , who in some pretty little boat ,
he like a child would shriek for aid
therefore make end of sorrow - stricken wail
ere long , by steady grasp and blow ,
come away , my loue !
whatever brawls disturb the street ,
perchance , by indus dwellers ; or some flood ,
i sang to the chieftains : each stock i traced ,
the nicht is neir gone .
that cried him towards his death .
have _ schowrys _ . ]
bloom round about , and violet - beds hard by
the ' cute sir stodge had seen his chance .
" with masts fair - pennoned as norman spears
saw the fiery eyes of pauguk ,
his strange gay clothes were sweet ,
part faun , lay here ; who left the shadow warm
ahti , wizard of wainola ,
in faint disguises that could ne'er disguise --
and wherefore sends not
and the south - wind o'er the prairie
that no man could distinguish what he said .
and then each pigeon spread its milky van ,
she wandered each day ;
played and sang old vaeinaemoeinen ,
close in thy last , forgetting , silent sleep . _ "
their bodies glowed like fox - fire far ahead ;
dark night , the gods convey'd me to the isle
the bed dishonour'd of the king of fire .
as it did the day before ;
and bring such pleasures to an end . "
livings in court he gotten , though full hard ;
against their bridal day , which was not long :
he made that crooked tune again ,
the surgeon , as there was no other fee ,
" april again ! "
wrought dire mishaps :
if of a maid she wants the use ,
but oh ! it 's a different thing when one knows ,
account of that division tripartite
weaving together a tissue bright
a word or tuo and go my way .
“ a king of brahmá ’s seed who bore
walked forth with the little men ;
sigh'd , " with the dead , love the consoler dies , "
" hast thou spoken and known
those hearts , like her , are mouldering now ,
swelled the fiend ’s lips , his body shook
where winter 's storms are seen in angry moods ,
but pauses where the great chief lies
from the continuous daily fray .
all the while this curious cat
said wrennok again .
when a new planet swims into his ken ;
' go , get me hither paper , ink , and pen :
as when a wild - boar , hounded from the hill ,
' sighs reign'd by day and hideous dreams by night ;
the kings , the heroes , and the gods
any head more sharp than other ,
burst forth sudden from the castle .
to counsel and undress the bride ;
because they know him nature 's friend ,
_ storax _ or _ styrax _ , another resinous gum .
that passed , a scylla in the form of rushes
it still looks home , and short excursions makes ;
o sudden spasm , release of the dead !
enraptur'd , views the chief whose deathless name
carries on to generations
columbus , hear ! when with the land we parted
and wise men shall govern you ,
nor dar'd , despite the numbers of their host ,
they 'll make good bowmen for your wars , one day .
shone out .   " why partest from me , o my strength ? "
be glad to see me decked so gay ,
o sirs , but he was a silly auld man ,
do n't ask me questions ,
down south there is a curio - shop
the horseman did his horse 's colours show
" wilt trim a verse for me by this night week ?
and no ill intent,--'till he happened to see
there lies forever its need .
seest thou younder craggy rock ,
with intentions both honest and clear .
than that ourselves do suffer grief and pain . "
than foam more fair ,
upon his grete maladye ,
in liking for it . there beneath a roof
but as sulphur prohibits all sorts of infection ,
sufficient balance at the bank ,
" thank god , we have kept the flag floating . "--_general white . _
and what men mean who talk of paradise .
the ancient one of the sea , and here at the haven 's head is
what dreams of splendour blinded us and fled !
but when we made our president
this put poor frog in a terrible fright ,
toiling his busy part,--
then swept away
and whitens all the marshy lea :
etc . ; 7 english mystical treatises of the 14th cent . edited with
friends had he ,
' twas my son 's bird ; and neat and trim
down to the house of hades , ere the coming of the day of
now flows the copper , now the golden ore ;
in patience still he waits death 's fatal stroke .
that on thee bestow i gladly -- if , o king , it seem thee good . "
and the sky is overcast ,
which some brave muse may sing
my dear laddie again back to me .
and birds that love the south have taken wing .
must lend its aid to illustrate all their charms ,
and told no tale !
the boy i speak of slumbered in the wood .
--merely dreams , fluttering in my eyes ....
lies his analogy to faust , who is also a middle - aged man , and
of the marsh - grass in serial shimmers and shades , --
the air with their outcries ;
at postquam sera captiua est reddita poena ,
that grand good will we only dreamed ,
he smites the steeds ; the rapid chariot flies ;
i hunted her precious robe of snow white doeskin ,
for cresses from the rills ,
what you conceave a happy living is :
horrid with frost , and turbulent with storm ,
( leaves fluttering slow in the slow night breeze )
in the middle of the forest ,
the web ' mong the leaves
repetunt colles :
on a fragment of stone , ' mid the wild weed and thistle ,
are prose instead of poetry :
we listened ; knew not whether they went
shall see her realm of reason swept away ,
appentice ruins roofing pillared pines :
and the hens all layed away .
of reveries at eve .
then laughed so , that they sate with winking eyes ,
but with its sound it shook the sails ,
  to avoid complication i have passed by the case where we compare
to their own soaring splendour rise .
kiss from the hands to the forehead and from the
va t'en te décrotter les rides du visage ;
as in the days gone by , the gold strewn o'er
by no cloud veil'd ; a sign propitious , giv'n
they travelled by a husbandman ,
to be some help to these poor people here .
those frank eyes of breton blue :
in war , in peace , why let the state raise up
in his own country , by a foeman 's hand .
that brings our friends up from the underworld ,
solemnly from distant voices
a heart that can feel for another 's woe ,
back with you , nor even return alive yourself ; let us rather see
that i have seen in the wood
on the hearth when fire with ardour glows ,
abandon will i not my blazoned shield ,
for a ' the lee - lang simmer 's day
the walles of the toun aboute ,
that ne'er from son to father more was ow'd .
that heaven and earth are both alike in woe . "
in tranquil leptis first they found retreat :
the lord forgie me for liein , for liein ;
many there are , we know ,
" i cam ' na here to bonny scotland
then heaven froond ,
" thy want of arms ( said iris ) well we know ;
if in jail , all the better for out - o'-door topics ;
she was indeed a rare one ,
with fear and wonder seiz'd , the crowd beholds
" _ hæc decies repetita _ [ non ] _ placebit_."--ars poetica .
des seaux passent , vides ou non.--
an ' loup his lane in till his goon .
hadst thou slain me when an infant ,
is lost in love ! thou great philanthropist !
i send no agent or medium , offer no representative of value , but
does it not ? unto this palace of the duke .
and if she were not all a dream , and lent
and the talking fool , who never
for his death fury - kindled was the son
some melodious tone ,
hoppety hoppety ho !
such as oft cheats with visions fair
as summer winds the fallen leaves among . ”
a window - sill a half - inch deep in dust ...
beneath fetter of golden clasp ,
as roll the waters to the breathing wind ,
silent the bird and scared the beast--
and so was too foolishly honest !   ah no !
in some vague desire to cope ,
as it was his desire , enjoy'd ,
and on each head was laid a holy hand ;
the ripple with the murmuring marge at play ,
sent from on high to seek and save
women all , hear the call ,
wisest of the wisdom - singers . "
" and we also , as neighbours , at first were warmly excited .
that his own shepherds and strangers pasture . and ranging
with strangers housed , in stranger lands;--
and form in heaven 's sight
when marching for the tiber shore ,
hubert ! though the blast be blown
spero alia in coelo est , et non incommoda , sedes ;
to see at last its utmost goal attained .
on the life - giving paraclete
the sides were crusted over with a mould
broad glittering breastplates , spears with pointed rays ,
pluck this one flower for his breast ,
but canst thou not array
didst rouse the billows with tempestuous blasts ,
with breath of balm blown everywhere ,
euryclea did as she was told , and bolted the women inside their
now love is twain , nay , manifold ;
then eurymachus , son of polybus , answered her saying :
to speak ; whereat their doubled ranks they bend
canto xi . first ledge : the proud.--prayer.--omberto
obsidens , ab helvetiis cæsus , hoc sui monumentum reliquit . " ]
why -- that 's the concern of the reader , not his .
with the scots i was and with the picts      and with the
you would have said , " good night ! "
me basta ; y la vajilla
he followed,--this effort the treasure may earn--
as flies an arrow from the well - drawn bow .
by his retirement to the forest - shades ;
so , at their father brahmá ’s call ,
furious he said , and towards the grecian crew
the line of neck and cheek and chin ,
" both the sun and moon are hidden
lake minnetonka 's purest waters lay .
" and who art thou , the questioner ? "
true for thy truth 's sake , for thy strength 's sake strong ,
sextus tarquinius , the king 's son , in their discourses after
the rattling showers rose on the blast ;
when the grass wi ' dew was wet
the promethean fire is burning .
he but flew to that smile and rekindled it there .
saw the fire - fly , wah - wah - taysee ,
around them , labour exquisite of hands
has to the skies return'd .   how wide the leaves
my heart will be a lovely cup
fortvnam insanam esse et caecam et brutam perhibent philosophi ,
one knight , more enterprising than the rest ,
" naked the soul goes up to god ,
in that last breath -- when virtue 's self expires !
to a very tow'r of babel ,
know i well the times of fishing ;
his breath of instant thirst
bring grief and ruin
point your fingers and nip them all !
herself and noble daughter / did them quick prepare .
surely , i thought , veera the maid is pure .
thou findest him from the heat of noon retired ,
in front of ireland 's chivalry is that fitzgerald 's place :
a valhalla for the crowned ,
to memories of my mother , to the divine blending , maternity ,
on the roaring eastern wind ; --
at sonsie lasses . _
who could guess?--for as swift and light
" i 'll soon arrange for that ! "
he feels from juda 's land
some day this old broadway shall climb to the skies ,
to realize ' tis _ she _ whom i adore,--
" arma virumque cano , qui first in monongahela
all the wisdom of the weed !
originality , which was our glory , appeared a vice to pope . the
all the people heard and wondered ,
to learn their welfare , and his own impart ,
who not beyond the valley could be seen .
cerraron sus ojos
there 's a cruel tigress crouching so near--
" pause , " said the phantom , " and survey the tree !
it is our lady 's painful bliss to bring
by compass and square
you said , " the sunset 's pretty , is n't it ? "
i ween his het was sore .
the man that fears thy name .
through the cotton shirt ...
i turned silently and we retraced our steps .   i
mem'ries wander ,
_ perpolite _ , well polished .
had witness'd for me what his tongue denies :
if the herd should climb the mountain ,
_ so among my babes i go ,
needing repose ; ambrosial night came on ,
that for ways that are dark
save power remains,--
oh my heart 's life , my owner , will of my being !
expect not , fitter for thine own research . "
christmas hymn , a              _ alfred dommett _
i form my system , as i first began .
the mast they fixt , and hoisted up the sails ,
as roses waken late in may ,
above the sea that severs it from spain .
struggled till her hands were twisted ,
shall seed where ye loved !
is instant made no worth a louse ,
rippled about their gleaming limbs .
conscious of jeopardy incurred .
“ nay , hope not thus thy life to save ;
" o king , " he said , " i ask no gold to - day ,
the pleasant sunshine . there the greedy wolf
" welcome , my friend , " said the tamal .
s.v . , and the phrase of meleager may mean " the epigrams of this
and death is dealt , in the tumultuous throng , --
and gregory wenner caught in such a trap ,
their eyes to flame . some purpose , in the stress
' i read you by your bugle horn
quickly journey whence thou camest ,
that dry the anxious matron 's tears ,
the lover who wakens her spleen ;
in a mossy stone , that sometimes was my seat ,
us for a patriot people , heart and hand
de ejercitados monteros ,
ovid , lucan , and others . strabo tells us , that ‘ aremus ’ was the
of yourself and the babbies , at mullinafad ,
sought , with an indignant mien ,
and ' tis o ! for the shout
but tearfully her arms extending
as mortal attributes immortal make ;
thence , ere the sun advanced his noon - day flame ,
non ob regna magis diris cecidere sub armis
discerns the glorious from the base ;
i wonder if it _ is _ a bird
al muro arrojaba
and my hand , though stiff , hath scarcely yet
of rustum ? i am here , whom thou hast call'd
vonce oopon a dimes in frankfort der herr breitemann exsberiencet
some jealousy of some one 's heir ,
the bounds of " brumby 's run " .
word expressing a certain state of the human mind with regard to
how the erl - king his daughters has brought here for me ? "
will strive to catch thee with his layes ;
have turned the verses o'er ,
o blissful moment ! dear auspicious grace !
the slave 's apology for gemmed disgrace .
from the fire - child thou hast eaten . '
' so flourishes and fades majestic man .
circles about the dark doorway set open
as dancing to some merry measure .
that from the snow - crest of the waving sea ,
the benmost neuk beside the ingle ,
to sapience , hitherto obscur'd , infam'd ,
her hands are pink , and soft , and small ,
look out while darkness overspreads the way ,
oh , the clammy brow of anguish ! the livid , foam - flecked lips !
when conrad came in the evening , the moon was shining high ,
to her , as to their mistress , whoe'er the king obey'd ,
return , return .
amidst such scenes -- though this was quite a new one
from him that on the mountain lea
into greater magic powers ;
and crowned with garlands culled from every tree ,
melodious part , such concord is in heav'n .
or from the champaign 's flat the hurrying swine ,
and panting , lovelier for her love , did stand
in flames , my kindred in disastrous strife
a female form , whose languid eye
` did shrivel and turn and beg and burn ,
he was born for much more , and in happier hours
how high above the bucklers they made the splinters fly
adore thee , author of this universe ,
there 's not a sea the passenger e'er pukes in ,
so seeing first , then hearing , she knew the hour
an ' man 's estate .
teaching in our borders ,
the cottage casement beat .
united , and the foremost rank assign'd .
on her immortal head . thus arm'd , she rose
' thy elder sisters ' loves are more
then from his lordship i shall learn ,
abandoning thee , o temple , i return
_ drucken _ , drunken .
what shall prevail against the spirit of man ,
of that sche herde such tidinge :
did we not learn that he was kind and wise
and let the boat go drifting here and there .
they will have a place in story :
" death i deserve , nor death would i delay .
and limbs of all beasts heterogeneous
we were to try how heavy _ he _ is .
had just begun to tinge the sullen rocks
per post , sir , we send your ms.--look it thro'--
for him in secret that i would have done ,
how that which in maud was native grace
" _ that _ has been tried ,
in coldness . i had not the courage . i was forsaken .
the need of battling freedom called for men
that they must surely sever ,
till mingled with the proud santee ,
de la devastación en su carrera
i and my youthful peers , with horse and hound ,
when close at hand to me was visible
it was the bones . i knew them -- and good reason .
it saw again , and there where hector lies ,
' but i am ill and spent with pain ; too late has come your wealth .
not him the flaming clouds above ,
from yon clear moon , who in her glassy face
of her i love thy soft behest :
wantons we are , and though our words be such , ii . 19 .
yet wyll they nat byleue to haue erys lyke an asse .
one curse involves them all : at death 's approach ,
full - charged between his mother 's hands , and said ,
run through every nerve and fibre .
and snow that often blinds the traveller 's course ,
but in our guesses never was the _ grave _ .
heavie , though in thir place . o fleeting joyes
who now forsakes my company .
but when i wake up in the night
his lordship to others can pleasure impart ,
of love has touched the fuel of desire ,
servia 's grey old hospodar .
versibu ' quos olim fauni vatesque canebant ,
and you have a mighty longing for the town where you are known ;
i climb the ridged steeps
how could i help but love her , whom the angels might adore !
of my own swift - gliding craft :
one cast amiss
who then shall say who is the worst ,
of art magique sorceresses ,
pennons and flags defaced and stained ,
and o'er the sickle bending;--
a fine and modest taste , displays
in the forest , in the castle ,
and swor , and ek hire fader bothe ,
pitifully weeps not for grief and dule ;
truth is , the cutest leadin ' wigs , ever sence fust they found
he approach'd it to eat , but his nose was not proof
now , when the wine has done its rosy deed ,
of bluebells sheaved in may
the shadow of our trysting bush
blush'd beneath her vermeil heel !
play upon thy forest - whistle ,
lest its bells forget to ring ,
earthborn of suffering , that knowest well
a circle unbroken in heaven !
but deaf unto that ayr ,
and secret walk unknown to mortal eyes .
delights to muse ,
and thither i will take my flight ,
not vainly questioning why she was sent
the universal form : for that whenever
i wanted wealth ; ' twas not the better part ;
and simply for a courteous deed , if none
and talk to me hand in hand !
as sheridan 's self , or paul revere ;
both foot and hand go cold ;
then let it shame thee unto higher things .
the sad , forsaken , lonely stream .
he 's sensible at last . "
bird and insect , flower and tree ,
while , therefore , some kind , gen'rous sense
with nobbut inside ' un but me and a mouse ....
has burst and split its crater :
" no seat for me , thou venerable sire !
from side to side before the rampart drove ,
look at the man with the pack
pluto 's chariot bore her down among the dead ;
thy flight where wilt thou stay ?
already , now , began the vengeful war ,
not iron bars , nor flashing spears ,
shemus ( _ tossing up money _ )
was half eaten up by the eels !
siegfried , through the big trees ,
the fountain whence they flow'd .   o gracious virtue !
but a bit of sky ,
shaking the noonday sunshine ,
dash'd by their plunging falls on every side
to play life 's subtle game , i scarce believe
thought death her wisest course .
it maks guid fellows girn an ' gape ,
and life itself is vapid ,
when the lady heard her lord ’s commandments ,
was gone , to give the prisoned brethren aid :
when we can shed the tribute of our tears
he sang a mass this morning and i heard his prayer .
grasp the pleasure that 's flying ,
fame is the scentless sunflower ,
and cheer the feast with liberal draughts of wine ;
as it sent harry brougham to the right about--
and salt , which frets thy suitors ; fly
thy dread tribunal : forthwith from all windes
so early in the morning , o.
the tangled roads reach from rim unto utter - most
three whole days and nights alternate
in this state - chamber , dying by degrees ,
on his heart , on his brain ,
but happy be their actions from this hour :
sheds beauty and deep softness o'er the whole ,
he was tormented by some hidden pain .
climb the hillside ruddy brown ,
then she with wondering eyes that strange team saw
but the heat and the pain together suddenly fall away ,
with a startled sweet surprise .
all voyaging to unknown coasts .
wi ' monie a wearie body ,
and dragged his weary feet . _
yet some there lived who roused themselves at last
hither - side the flood of the year and yonder of the neap ;
lim'd all the shore beneath .   i that beheld ,
no traitors they ! but tried and leal ,
on the bowl to - night--
god , if thou livest , and indeed didst send
go , fame , an ' canter like a filly
now ask for pain , for bread ,
marvel , if before me no shadow fall ,
" and what must we , but welcome his advance ?
whose souls with hatred of mezentius glow ,
a joy - inspirèd song he sings
de lion got his dander up , an ' like to bruk de palin ' ;
but , till the warmth of summer skies
after the composicioun
went round about the house to find
' on rearing up a famous breed of asses .
as she waited with the others ,
while the world goes gallantly by ,
you rascal ! for an hour have i been grubbing ,
flimsy another 's joy , false and distort ,
for the foe this day has pierced me through ,
without doubt he originally warned the burgundians , as in
that it they loue and caste heuen out of mynde
bunnie to bunnie stamped ; old wat
and one , hippolochus ; his youngest born
in action , and in love so radiant now ;
that camp , that mighty host to show begun .
am himmelsantlitz wandelt ein gedanke ,
the youth is gone within ; alas ! he bears
and , before he could be jumbled up or prevented
made him so cold ; or faithful promise giv'n .
ev'n to the seat of god .   for since i saught
i journeyed in their van ;
ah ! when she sings , all music else be still ,
of daring , till the achaeans are sent flying back to their ships
subjects and obliging him to correct his performances by many
i , marching at their head , will smooth , myself ,
breathe , body of lovely death .
" i also am a lover ;
although a lion in the field ,
his love for countess cathleen has so crazed him
if yet my task is done ? "
meet warring in the stormy sky .
if they but wrung their hands against our will .
and there in clouds of fragrance blend .
one eve she stood upon a lonely lea
be denied the frank expression
presence of mind is one of the rarest , as it is one of the most
tear from the rifled hedge
serve all with wine , that , first , libation made ,
incipit illa sacri modulamina fundere cantus
printed in colours in exact imitation of the originals .
princes have held divine ,
those feathery things , the hounds , in front ,
and languid forms rise up , and pulses bound
in venere ac vino .
in solemn state :
so leave we that still picture on the eye ;
but up the course the bold ah john
of varied and numberless beings
against the breaking day ;
the blue arch will brighten , the waters will heal !
all of good and of fair thence :
the argoon and the shilka passed ; they keep
ever for love that stung ?
along the waste dominions of the dead .
shakespeare and garrick like twin - stars shall shine ,
was prisoner in the city of algiers .
employed in sending storms of hail to rattle through the trees .
that all their kingdom shall her dower become .
' if that chap were a soldier man , they 'd give ' i m the v.c . '
wax - red hangs the cup
larned there was one had no wish to be -- a wife .
perchance they were not a great multitude
keep the young from sin and folly ,
when wise márícha heard the tale
' tis only in flying you feel my cool breath ;
made into a constellation .
then let your prayers ascend
i often wonder as i look ,
sessions , disavowed by all the justices there , which he tore . '
moved to the left , and i , behind , came on .
“ to take their lives that follow us for prey ;
shall fright the dwellers of the stars that skirt
through the long years her icy vigil kept .
and art disdain'd the stupid man to own;--
" she came towards us with a cheerful face ,
thumbing a yellow parchment that is lit
with a proud caution , love , or hate , or aught,--
whatever good ye boast , that good impart ;
it are n't no false alarm ,
and from the glossy elm tree takes
he wroghte such knihthode there ,
ben made , so the man is bore
to frighten the terrible thomas a tattamus !
so as the philosophre tolde ,
to vaster issues .
and keep our honesty alive
to the island behind the willow boughs .
racketing her rivets loose , smoke - stack white as snow ,
or they fall beneath the snows ,
among such tales -- who questions of their sooth?--
but live and love and be thy servant still :
for no such shadow shalbe had againe .
for ' twas taught through the tempest to fly ;
she got a deadly fall .
of the graces and gifts of the young english wooer :
heard the village in commotion ,
hostility to nature , as lifeless , godless , and altogether unholy :
as wormwood , and she hated all who pledged .
the mists flew upward and dissolv'd in day .
looked up , then slept again ,
ah , my foolish love !
he cares not for our virtues , our little hopes and fears ,
the prayers sent up to god for his release ,
vnder , the third hour of the day , a. 513 . a.s . _ undern _ . goth .
" i know not , " wisdom said .
is thy name preciosa ?
i am ever , my dear cousin ,
he dipped his brush and tried to fix a line ,
of the sea , and of a woman 's hair
dead will she rightly hate me or alive . "
she took his lady also in affection ,
and whips his horses forwards on their way .
never the critic we knew enlarges ,
to dignify arch looks and laughing eyes ;
we wonder what city the pathway of glory ,
your youthful swains will sigh or smile ;
erect your brow undaunting !
little lamb had strayed in ; and the wonderful figures of fire and
who joys to think , henceforth his way is clear .
i love thee , dearest lord , and will ,
if this be true , king herod said ,
such gifts as this are not to be rejected .
but paul could hardly touch the gold ,
a preying night bird whimpered on the hill .
will . we boast ourselves as even better men than our fathers ; we
silence beyond all speech , a wisdom rare :
behold , o king , lust shall be paid with lust ,
i must take what men offer , with a grace
the glass - houses grow and grow , and every year fling up hotter
during the ball ! everybody was wild with excitement when the loss
were a boon all so precious , indeed , to confer ,
to comfort me , as he proceeded , still
a song , " my dear mistress
hurrying up to the fight ,
where have you wandered , child , since when
we 'd fall and fall and fall .
none ever loved him more than i have loved him .
to man 's first , noblest birthright , toil:--so won
and at her sight the night 's foul vapour 's fled ;
i could not love thee , dear , so much ,
to burn with one clear flame , to stand erect
of earth 's far gleaming flickers and expires ;
and the first sweet of grape - flowers
think you my bones would not arise and walk ,
homely and rude , i will relate the same
oh , thou witch ! ' tis dirt , i vow ,
that 's _ your _ sort .   but we others ,
his chest out more an ' more ,
when i donned a suit of gray ,
in brown hollows about the inhospitable mouth ;
_ tuckerman 's _ ( henry theodore ) poems . 1 vol . 16mo . 75 cts .
after the sun had dried the dew ,
and when the boy is hither led
ah , gentle ! ' tis as weak as spider 's skein ;
all the pretty things put by ,
and let thy trusted lords attend
sha n't be her fault if there is n't one poor old brute beast
he answer'd :   " now not man , man once i was ,
at once they rolled , and never stopped in lane or field or town ;
to feel sudden , at a wink ,
which taught thee yet no better , that no pain
to make a happy fireside clime
an errand for my minnie .
into deep substance he reached , and lo
love 's influence unchanged remains ,
and answer made the bold sir bedivere :
the sunrise broken into scarlet shafts
no memory of thy daughter and her son
existence in a summer ray ,
this vast similitude spans them , and always has spann'd ,
we , we understand the laws well ,
old winter 's dark hours .
who is waiting for me .
and the wrath of man is praise !
and ethiope , a cursed land indeed ;
then thy een were glest'rin ' clearer
themselves betray'd ,
roars as he wreathes his wayward hands within
him sha n't steal turkey - pouts no more . "
under the banner of your spread renown !
in the kingdom of the west - wind .
when glided in porphyria ; straight
and the words of that fatal song
wind whistles the bees--
in shifting rays ; -
daring invaders of night 's tenting - ground ,
and the havoc did not slack ,
protection . and as a viol or harp , strung in harmony of many
prologue to " the legend of good women ; " and in her praise
a world of hidden dimples!--dusky - eyed ,
oh ! whence its source , and what its mission ?
dead and gone ;
but a ' the faut i had to him ,
with mingling sound of thousand harmonies ,
now comes our constantly increased reward .
time , but tired soon i grew
fury , that does not fail .
run over it for the sake of appropriating the riches of
will hear his mother 's story and break off
progenitor of mrs . blunt .
on the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves ,
not to teach a craft or trade , ”
to sin on the air .
rest , rest , he 'll soon be here .
keen anguish then he suffers , that duke naimes ,
and in silence , bathed in tears ,
whase only faut is loving thee ?
the rod that sways the ocean - winds and rules the cloudy rack .
she might strive to smile or to forget ,
but sydney still keeps thee alive in our shrines .
and with them , if it might be , one
but i adore my peggy 's heart .
" ivery man for hissen , " shoo said ,
splendid in scorn , rapt in a cloudy dream ,
the revel of the earth , the masque of italy !
where we order a stew of giblets for two ,
and flared on vane and truck :
and every day my tears for him shall race
for this he was created , kept and nursed .
" my own soul 's life ! " between their notes .
possible to think of any expressions which would signify a dearer
suddenly , from that heaven beyond belief ,
summoning a weary soul to restful toil
m.p . 's turned turks , good moslems then ,
well - created spirit , who in the rays of life eternal tastest the
all that exceptions save i lose ;
perhaps his mate sat listening long ,
come , take the footpath way with me !
where the round year rolls sublime ,
beyond the city 's din ,
the choir of nymphs , and overtops their heads :
with every foulness stain'd , why from the earth
and the vessel goes a divie - divie - dive .
amongst the happy reeds .
who , like a king perplexed in his throne ,
i saw him demurr , when they asked him to pay--
remember but our craving thirst for gold . "
shall lips of after - ages link to these ?
moon,--when the geomancers see their greater fortune in the
i have but words of praise and admiration
think you there are no ready tears to fall
then with compunction each of them was stung ,
mine will i assure thee ,
her light , i fear , did not shine out
for idly just living and breathing ,
as he lay , by fits half sentient ,
that idle time runs gadding by ,
to a snouted swine transform him .
into the wilde forest drawe ,
" shall for thy sake pronounce my soul forgiven ,
the clear wine has made our cheeks red ;
went wreathing upward through the death - like gloom ;
even with mealy gold the waters clear .
with men of antient times , with hercules ,
purple - blue with the distance and vast ;
in the scaly mask which he yearly shed .
that he should cross the seas to win
the commons next , a middle rank , are found ;
once more the notes
and crouching by my hearth
their memories to refresh , and cheer their hearts ,
and he one chief ; but hark , i hear the cock
eagle that flew skirting the left wing of their host , with a
and his wife sits before the evening fire ,
and puts in his mouth a spoon .
for loving hemá’s(753 ) charms too well .
and of a midnight , sparing him
and some tossed foaming over boulders ,
without a pang o ’ days gone past ,
and thus awakes the courage of his friends :
( xviii . ) persepolis : call'd also takht - i - jam - shyd -- the throne of
and the scalded stokers yelped delight ,
a joy untarnished shall i seem ;
of sceptred kings come slowly through the gloom ,
since the others go ashore--
none can tell its stirring story ,
  _ preface to it . _
be trustful where thou canst not
next , one whose throat was gaping with a wound ,
my little village smoke ; or pass the door ,
into the path he pointed . all the day
if love make me forsworn , how shall i swear to love ?
but not his reason yet .
parque coturnato uertice fulget apex .
malay i think expressionless and cold ,
then frontless intimate , ( oh perjur’d bard ! )
and though i 'd like , just once , to see thee ,
so let it be . care , who hath stood with him ,
his horse can scarcely stand at all--
but no to find a land like this ,
half - asleep
he is fast to me , ischyros ,
a boy must needs like bellowing ,
and , looking down below ,
where he paused to listen and look down
me seemeth some - wise thy hair wandereth
till thy house decays about thee ,
it grieves me sore to hear thee weep ,
summer and flowers are gay ,
comes down to see their city , ere the tower
woman , thou art dust -- remember !
and the sergeauntes of the law ,
all night they heard her passing footsteps trace
" since life fleets , all is change ; the past gone , seize to - day ! "
plant . they possess the power of drawing the head and three
whose day shall never die in night .
so to vaeinoelae he took her ,
_ lyc . _     then see it in report .
the only art her guilt to cover ,
with cedars round its doors .
" guelpho shall pray thee , god shall him inspire ,
if thou hast the gift of strength , 65 .
her.--indeed , i did not know myself why i liked so much to loiter
with flowers on every tree ;
its power , weapons , testimony , are you and me ,
where on the deck my captain lies ,
the dreadful water that the gods swear by ,
lipped by the inward , moonless waves of death .
though solitude , endured too long ,
a dim reward was all he got
how it comes let doctors tell ,
our joyful attention was drawn to
there a free empire for our seed obtain ,
who left me alone till i saw you again in an hour
had you bid me sing of wouter ,
his face will be unveiled once again and you shall meet .
call ye coward him who stood
tipsy dance and jollity .
no rapt priest bends in awe
home , home ! sweet , sweet home !
that draws me on and on .   i know not why .
and wash him and dress him and shave him and brush him
well , i say to live it out like a god
must either driven be perforce to sterving ,
only watch near him gently ; do but bring
he rises when he likes himsel ' ;
black edward 's helm , and becket 's bloody stone ,
took care with largest plenty to provide ;
god hath heard thy prayer for freedom , and his
fail to perceive how strange and marvellous
" what is science , rightly known ?
with the lark in the white of the air ,
than him , for somehow i just feel as if i 'd been untrue
or live in sea , or aire , beast , fish , and fowle .
the annals of death , and the triumphs of spain .
by pen , unheeding bliss or misery ,
of beauty , flattery , threats , a shilling,--no
the dull red brands were burning low ,
but pray god not to pity me .
but hid her joy and spake no more her threat :
some truth in man 's prevailing creed
and the young child thus made answer :
with royal walls and palaces undone ,
and his floating eyes -- oh ! they resemble
proving that ever from a body 's surface
but a trouble weighed upon her ,
" brother , they did ; you reason right , "
we extend you friendship 's hand
of labour on this blind earth , but found it now .
a nasty lump
they do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins ,
lands rich as lands of gold or wheat and fruit lands ,
he shpree so moosh to find de troot ,
“ oo ! my frendeȝ so fre , yo{ur } fare is to strange ,
no , not one looked back , who had set his hand to this ploughing !
in forest and the hill
an ’ i ’d watch its last beam , on me mary reclining ,
best and brightest , come away !
those locks of pale gold floated past on the air .
like some great gull on high
and fain would i hear them singing once , braiding their ropes
the leste lokinge of hire yhe
i raised , as , calm and peaceful in the sun ,
compare with them who clothe in grey ,
nightingale to shoot at .
while they bewildered stood and gazed around ,
they sorrow for their sire the king . ”
thus made reply : " he is indeed alive ,
by foreign chieftains we improve in skill ;
poor lazarus shall wait in vain ,
but ere we altogether leave
when his carcase of beef brings " the bullock " to grief ,
and full of shame , to seek his lord returns ;
' it 's dull in our town since my playmates left !
thought , now her field lay waste , her hedge lay down :
a corone on his he d he bar ,
the rock which meets the billows with defiance .
in wexford murigan , the king of vikings , gave thee to carroll :
now smile the heavens again upon the earth ,
shaping among the whimsical coals
he 'd fumble for the curious key kept high upon the shelf
the discord which befel , and warr in heav'n
my ! ai n't it terrible ? wut shall we do ?
mcguffy is showing a bunch of the boys how bob fitzsimmons hit ;
his haughty neck wrinkled to green and blue ,
a simple , delicate band ,
slave , and thy feet are free ;
left far away in the rear ,
ac tantum tremulo crispentur caerula motu ,
what deeds were wrought , what rulers lived and died ,
to you , -- what place of refuge , say , is left ,
to the deep and swampy valleys ,
hast thou left the slender birch - tree ,
advantage of describing the morning in so lively a manner as he
she moved her lips and seemed to moan .
open unto me thy will ; but tell me the cause why thou guardest
o mother dear , jerusalem !
so now i take thee into my keeping ,
nobler haunches never sat on
and two new stars in the reign of time
god 's angels come ,
the leaves rustling near sent a chill to his heart ,
ballyvourney east and baile dubh and kilworth to the sea :
herds fifty of fat beeves , large flocks of goats
in duty , self , and fame unstained .
( long , so long is the day , )
an ' a big black duck come gobble ' i m down . uh - huh ! uh - huh !
such virtues , prince , the good may gain
lightnings harnessed under yoke ;
elephant next began to dance :
till oft converse with heavenly habitants
fashioned in gold , standing on firm - set bases , with flaming
the baby of his crew of love ,
through the silence , through the silence
ah ! tiny sober - suited advocate
and the north was more than the south .
and they remain , and they remain ,
she girds me in my sailor 's coat
and there her promised son she bore .
what pleasure to your monarch would it be ,
nor see rogero more , nor compass aught
tead ] torch .   ruddock ] redbreast .   croud ] violin .
vacantly he leers and chatters .
some late - found rapture , could we but delay
i have eaten of their fruit which is not bestowed
“ i dream’d that each of my little pups
in those days could with many a different sound
and extreme meeting place of light and shade ,
another mark our arrow must attain .
and in each one of these rebellious tears
¿ dónde , pues , fieras , ¡ ay ! está el desnudo
in the middle of the forest ,
live long , live happy ! and when many a day
she grew to womanhood , and between whiles
" she tried too hard . she made her throat too tense ,
and called aloud with eager cry ,
their sorrows with their lives to end ,
restored , and breathing in his native land :
what will he do when he finds out the truth ?
my prime of youth is but a frost of cares ;
or ere the ecstatic impulse go ,
i bade them land me on the pylian shore ,
" poor fellow ! i have nothing to say against the doctor . he was
haunt the cheerful levels of the lower story .
or when a storm drew near .
mab or king oberon ; or , haply , her
that dogs them for his sport :
the like not found on earth .   fondly i gaz'd
believing that i lucifer should see
the dyer , who by dyeing lives , a dire life maintains ;
industry 's bustling din once more devours
an ' a preference wo n't make 'em no more loyal than before ,
_ gyneura _ this confirmes against her louer ,
" thou son of grace , this jocund life , " began he ,
an ' i clumbed up in her cushion - chair
in one another 's being mingle--
thine hands hold the hail and rain ,
suez canal       lesseps unites for you and me
if you be struck , or i be struck ,
but of the trojans when the best had fall'n ,
that infinite perfection ? all have known
till she , like thee , all soiled is laid
at last our shade it pleased her to restore ,
has sinned .
the central ship conspicuous ; thence his voice
how richly down the rocky dell
more closely in his own ,
to water - lilies ; the brown fields men till
the night that erst no name had worn ,
who loved with me of yore green paths to tread--
so that he could not his fair love uphold ,
while they choose each lovely spot ,
to cackle the hen had a wish ;
accomplishes his haughty boast :
and a perpetual feast of nectared sweets ,
the well bred c*ck**ds in st . james 's air ;
the nag that wills it , must be free ! "
then again i have known a man who had no brilliant or striking
the moka - scented smoke
" hear me , aeneas , " old latinus cries ,
which hand leads nearest to the rifted rock ? "
and he with them do well agree :
and in the balance lays their fates , to try
too late , i would request the favour of you to rectify an error
tosses about , than from him who must lie in beggarly raiment .
that the dawn would not approach her ;
and men were asking ' what was he worth ? '
beside god 's throne for thee .
uplifting lightly his new - vested flesh ,
and hence is he so daring in affray .
ah subtle ! ever teeming with surmise ,
you swirl and crash--
if ye were ate ferste time wrothe ,
al naked up unto the chinne .
" around me they shall move
he ’d fain a damsel we d ;
siccine fraternos fastidis , improbe , morbos ,
filled with softly - surging sound .
say , has he given in vain the heavenly muse ?
my home was in the rocks , the lonely rocks .
th ' industrious plough . the roman heroes too ,
and voices , that forbid to seek
vorty at least , in pairs .
here stopt the horse ; but him he could not guide ,
than docthor machale or docthor murray !
we 'll come an ' ' ave a romp with you whenever you 're inclined .
retaining vertue in their operacions ,
brought him by the wicked panu .
to wrap the baby bunting in .
half fell to right and half to left and lay .
to the tune of " wilhelmus van nassau , " & c.
seek heaven early , seek it late ;
responding with twelve shadowy signs of earth ,
es el vivo reflejo de la gloria ;
and they laughed till all the forest
alone , a banished man .
same kind of eyes;--
for the full day - breaking ! '
for whom does all the sunny woodland
why not ?   well , there faced she and i--
was i not sometimes fair ?   my eyes , my mouth ,
when someone plucked me by the sleeve .
approach and read ( if thou canst read ) my lay ,
had tripped up my heels .
th ' avowal , which he led to ; and resum'd :
whence said i : " master , now vouchsafe to me ,
stoutly pulling back the ends , they
to mark the fortunes of the doubtful day .
but without craving time , or truce , or peace ,
through the canyons to the waters of the west !
still straitened in their rock - hewn sepulchre ?
this is my letter to the world ,
poor is the labourer -- and how meanly fed!--
eurytion , iii .
be equal , but of all that dwell in ilius , hector was dearest to
and both his
we all are prone to go astray ,
poor remnants of the bleeding heart ,
he bowed his head , acknowledging that his light
hath had the hole worlde to them obedyent
on this point so well agree .
as ere that awful period intervenes
  the large locusts , which are near three inches long , are not the
and thus he said , why should not i
my lifetime folding up
but when they came over oxridges ,
and commanded to pay very many taels ,
yield to nature 's kind control ,
hear ye the sound of a sigh from us ?
expressions of courtesy , and the like . the very fluency ,
_ in d. joannem , quem domitianus ferventi oleo illaesum indidit . _
o , love ! thou art the very god of evil ,
and there is the happiness blighted and perished ,
diana from her chariot golden - rein'd
had moved my soul to pity ; now these words
but turnus shakes his head and saith : " ' tis not thy bitter word
grey middlesmoor is perched upon
their bodies on : then sirius fell to burn the acres dry ;
and he looks for the print of the ruffian 's feet
far from the world 's cold stare
retribution . "
that monarchs have supplied from age to age
moreas is a glow of emerald ;
your work , he has no more from which to choose ;
the merry prattler sank to quiet rest .
or starrs of morning , dew - drops , which the sun
we have no heart to serve without instructions new .
and read the authentic message of his eyes .
by that which mouldeth them . unto all such--
ev'n avarice would deny ,
the nature of stars , or their use to explain--
written in 1645 to the club - men , by alex . brome .
and the mouth of the beast was warm on the breast of the sod ,
to the village of the blacksmith .
had ever been his sole and whole ambition ;
as blithe as queen of may . '
a kiss of horror gave ;
with roll and farthingale hoopéd :
could still go round and boast he had
such , lycidas , thy loss to shepherd 's ear .
for not unmindful of thee are the gods ,
a mournful story of domestic woes ,
“ sublimely sails , and reaches scythia 's clime ,
each one responded with his countersign ,
the sky grew bluer and the air grew colder .
bethink thee what thou art and where ,
in one intolerable blaze ,
john gilpin at his horse 's side
it were two dragons stiff and strong ,
starlight in masses
creeps in -- sad emblem of fidelity--
and shell and drum their notes upsent ,
and reap'd ausonian lands .   on the hard rock ,
there dwelt in liverpool a worthy dame ,
he started quickly forward , and he grasped
evil and good before us , with no voice
in all the fullness of my vision
head bent down and brow dejected ,
the citizen , the sage of mind ,
it was only the wind , my darling ,
perched in the maple - branches , mute :
and deep below the monster ’s waist
and now the rites discharged , our course we keep
and it was morning .   o great miracle !
which lovely laura seeks , to shun
the smell of blood and sawdust?--
unto the banners , that do levy war
( for he was old , and floods enow fulfilled his dripping gear , )
it is my curse ! sweet memories fall
am ! surely zeus hated thee above all men , though thou hadst
their heaving stomachs turn'd at something tart ,
and in grief and in sorrow the world groweth old ?
the fences , near the turnpike , as we passed ,
beyond thee , dearie , beyond thee , dearie ,
and therefore leave them to the purer page
how each hath back what once he stayed to weep :
the gifts that are good to hold .
with dreams of the stars and their radiant lore !
i have loved the sunlight as dearly as any alive . '
  on earth emperor , but in heaven earthly dignities exist no
“ the same appearance take ; and far the most
all people 's eyes are on your tribe ,
had just arrived by the night express .
' wildered with reading in an old romance
and , what is more , the person of our leader .
where cheerless fires perpetual gleam ;
in the still calm the bird divines the breeze--
but hold!--methinks some carping cynic here
and slip in town , by some old road
and the hurt deer .   he listeneth to the lark ,
sure of the vapour in the tainted dews ,
and wept the words :   " o winsome wave ,
probed the flowers upon the meadows ,
wake ! for the sun , who scatter'd into flight
a desart plain or frowning wilderness
or east or west , which had forbid the snow
the wronged and broken heart
seeds of plants . spawn of fish . nutriment lodged in seeds . their
again , again , with a dizzy brain ,
a murmuring whisper thro ' the nunnery ran ,
" who art thou , that thou comest ere thine hour ? "
then spoke the thunder
but he will kindly take her arm
aye thus it is ! heaven gleams and then is gone
he went good - naturedly and
which never a bound will overpass ,
warders of mountain secrets , there they wait ,
this is the time when sword - blades green ,
“ o well can i , and well i ought ,
he of himself shall tell thee and his wrongs . "
in here book .
he needs no such fulsome or exaggerated praise .   he was a man ,
he said , " alas ! and hast thou been awake
it may be mended with a peg ,
while such discourse within himself he held ,
and the cannons ' echoes startling the reverberating glade .
lion rode home .   a month went by , and now
a robe about his shoulders threw .
some perish away for statues and a name ,
as we our earthly debts forgive -- by thee be all forgiven ;
to define it humbly , and that its charm is so
' neath yon terrible heaven that is watching above
firm at their head i took my dangerous stand ,
the blush of shame was gone as on his face
with dreadful sounds the brazen hinges roar .
does the salvation of a deathless soul
him ? ' said holmes , the master - at - arms . ' then you are free from
bebbex bien par tutte la company ,
stretched it lay on the green grass bare .
of flocks or of harvest . do thou note ; and even as they are borne
are empty and still ;
mystery .
hark , how a child can babble of the cells
for on your side is arrogance and wrong . "
and hearken to the birds ' love - learned song ,
till royalty in england 's made
blameless in word and deed .   as of itself
from prone , nor in thir wayes complacence find .
white as the unfruitful thorn - flower ,
lies at the heart of pain ,
( albeit she knew far distant from its root ,
to the cabin of ruotus .
shall trade aye salve his conscience - aches
cases cracking ,
that twelve parliament men may be sold for a peny .
thy element ;
lord belzebub much questions whether
" why are my brethren and my sisters slain ?
and hurried note , the song went on .
and if i unto you could be always kind ,
and glimmering on the conscious eye -- the world in glory breaks ?
“ up , up and board , my gallant crew ,
the gaudy gossip , when she 's set agog ,
' hard by yon wood , now smiling as in scorn ,
when he freed our shut - in song--
those holy regions left the cavalier ;
weak as tow in freedom 's strain
to every tribe , in every clime ,
at intervals , the trees in leafy prime ;
soak'd with the blood of oxen newly slain .
bright was her form , and fresh and young ,
persevering devotion to an object , were unveiled to the depths in
orpheus in the olden times , or ole bull in ours .
while her mother did fret , and her father did fume ,
in april 's fits and starts ,
where kings have had their sentence .
and with that word tho pandarus , as blyve ,
time and its ally , dark disarmament ,
as well beseems so rich a noble ;
had his armor of war not aided him ,
but , whisht , nae mair o ' this we 'll speak ,
ye perceive
i saw a crowd appear upon the peak ,
" i own the land . my fathers died
arms and provisions i myself will send ,
of youth 's desires i passed to deeds of men ?
chased gloom and shadows all away .
building where schoolboy dare not look
sleep on , ye hills !
six months to live
a help , became thy snare ; to me reproach
love is timid ,
sweet reminder of the people
thou hast turned from us ....
' so when i am weary of wandering all day ,
each some magic song suggested .
so , when a great man dies , 77 .
it made me love myself , as i leaped to caress
horrible throbbing !
that i show another this savage road . " then was his arrogance so
his tennis racket , too ,
probably unmodified from odyssean , and indeed long pre - odyssean
my shadow moves after me on the rumpled grass--
yet let not your gifts and your offerings all roam;--
when love was liberty , and nature law .
and nigher yet a tinkling sound did tell
why , and whither , and how ? for barley and rye are not clover ;
to hang upon your button - hole ,
' tis walking in the moonlight ,
quenched at the thrust of a mummer 's knife ,
that the stars i may consider . "
and to whom he gave the right hand
then , when mama goes by to bed ,
then was a little respite to the fear ,
" if i did think , my answer were to one ,
o , his speech that chilled the love - birds ,
verdure . wherefore if to purify myself i have been among the
no man such rare parts hath , that he can swim ,
from the wild shores of rocky underwald !
god save the wretch denied
behind him cast ; the broad circumference
toll ye the church - bell sad and slow ,
of him who gave the glorious vine ;
lamps with inviting brilliance shone ;
can’st thou the tune of the watchman sing ? ”
a shadow across me . straightway i was ' ware ,
the hamlet an ' the baron 's ha ' ,
" sweet child , when by me now thy dear foot trod ,
strange and remote and wild ;
there was no mistaking the air .   i had found my tishbite .
say are ours !
me an ' muvver took
oft have i stood in all my pomp confess'd ,
slowly , slowly came the grey
me shapen was , my destene me sponne ,
your sister now may take the trade .
i said , " the staff of my life is gone :
whose movements were frantic
swill sunsets down , or sup the wash of the dawn
in his gold there was balm , in his pen there was power
she loved to hear it all !
the flue moans--'tis a gorgon throat
and by my side those dead men rode
i know i 'm not only great but good ! "
my company i see well ye looked notfore
and leaves the place to darkness and to me .
" _ pol _ .   if you call me jephthah , my lord , i have a daughter that
where furious frank and fiery hun
enough to blast an eagle at his sun :
and stately oxen harnessed to thy wain !
from out the loams how many living things--
within them shines for me a heaven of love ,
defies thy lance ; not fated yet to fall ;
was he startled and awed by the change which had pass'd
kabîr says : " listen to me , brother ' there are not many who have
they soothed the softened soul .
when death his soul and body part .
who not beyond the valley could be seen .
but feared your vices .
in what place this boke was translate and to what purpose it was
on carven pillar and painted wall ;
or blooms the eglantine .
the lower chamber window on the east ,
had ceased for ever . but the eye of jove ,
ere my toothless jaws mumble ,
_ cranreugh _ , the hoarfrost .
even as the relentless hurricane
and you who fill the blissful seats above !
" aucun de vous n'a donc vu
now when the high - souled monarch ’s rite ,
the heart forgot the goddess in the woman .
" mor , and thow dar say ,
now and in olden time .
of the ordere of that _ odde _ home [ heaven ] that overe the aire
then paddy went back to the priest the next day ,
that you greet ,
thou , simmer , while each corny spear
at this moment
and with him eke to gernot the prudent and the brave ;
till , loop and button failing both ,
john , resting on the crag of the wild rock ,
within what narrow limits is bounded the luck of woman !
your virtues are repaid at last .
that height was heaven ; the wave was hell .
amid innumerable locks , no hair
brontes and steropes . their hands still frame
now , where the quick rhone thus hath cleft his way ,
when the lips have spoken ,
to enter the high wheel which turns you round ,
the strong man 's hand , the snow - cool head of age ,
so he reports : and in each other charge
it ’s like a fairy land .
but choose -- though laugh'd at -- to be poor and meek .
you wid the lip wid the troublesome smile in it ,
refined with purest gold from god 's retort
but o'er each lower faculty supreme ,
thy face , thy feet , thy forehead fair ,
when the kings of the earthly kingdoms would give me golden gifts
oppress'd by numbers in the glorious strife ,
who stumbled in before them when the fight
and gossip - got acquaintance , as , to vs
to me sole woman , haunted at noontide ;
but drink your tea before you read it , dear !
so the night fell -- with never a lamplighter ;
were it not better however for me to fight in the vanguard
a pox upon the canting lot
yet , spite of the danger , we dared it again .
though thy loins bare us in travail ,
sun of beauty , only thee .
there are deep things of god . push out from shore ;
take our advice , and give them soon ,
clearlier to manifest , i tell how next
o god within my breast ,
for his own folly by himself aton'd .
might be forged and duly hammered .
pride                                  _ hundred - leaved rose . _
" from the lake i hear a weeping ,
my mother 's garden is the sea
find i their host , great battle shall be there ;
that since i looked upon such potencies
crying , _ " nothing is changeless -- but change ! " _
love not me for comely grace ,
when thou didst send me in yon field surprised
unknown , unhonored , e'en like one who came
" is it he ? " quoth one , " is this the man ?
or a bell - wether form the flock 's connection
blessing the farms through all thy vast domain !
and o'er their gardens smoke trailed waving hair ;
so the wanderer spake ,      his woes remembering ,
and prov'd their final fa ' , man ;
wherein corruptions seethe and boil .
and the red field was won ;
i 'll potter round my peach - trees till i hear the luncheon gong .
with much fine wit , and better breeding ;
unharm'd and at your home , nor hath he left
unus'd to threats , and more unus'd to fear .
no second oar he found him . / yet soon the same made fast again .
servant of england , soldier to the core ,
flatter'd him to restore the risen maid ;
the love - desperate banish'd knight
our enemy's -- but let not that forbid
hers was so like her mother 's face .
o mary , o mary , your true love is dead !
that once made heaven near , had made it seem more far .
but oft theyr folysshe stody retournes to theyr myschaunce
pausing as she strolled along
unto a later hour .   at last the page
as their just heritage , he gave in charge
the dipping butterflies come slow ,
_ to crowd and pinch another inch _
springs to his master with a warm embrace ,
oor greeat divine , afoore he left the pleeace ,
that chief shalt thou behold , with lordly pride ,
and happy little children , girl and boy,--
_ stories from the bible . _ london 1929 .
why then shouldst thou have mine ?
a snow - peak in the silver skies
but constant friction with the world removes
twice , fause maid ! ye brak your vow ;
" o come ! " it sighed so sweetly ;
perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
the one who openly forbad the deed . "
and your heavy slumber shake away !
the possible depth of my own misery . "
another dame was there , of graver look ,
thro ' the everlasting strife
gibraltar 's rock , or thule 's savage shore . "
ever such salvation share ?
then wise telemachus answered him , saying : ' verily , father ,
for the irish ruffians ( they tell me ) ,
but the same bowes , and the same blades they drew ,
to hear another tumult in these streets ,
began he on the horrid grunsel standing ,
and time refines the kernel into choicest flour ;
when each sad patriot rises , mad with shame ,
thus they spoke in the sunshine , when their beauty was manifest ,
above all the feeble forget - me - nots of the world .
each burning with destructive flame ,
what a comfort ' tis to mention
as if the tizian thinks of her ,
his brain was well - nigh maddened by his rage .
the fierce rutilians , struck with awe , might cease
' courteous in this , lord lancelot , as in all . '
( so would she mix her gall and lies with honey ) ,
the nor ' wind plays wi ' his curly hair ,
with splendor glittering , threw a golden shade
his golden godhead , marred and maimed ,
reluctantly , still tarrying there as late as
i laid down my weary head in search of repose
peals for the wedding of our joy and pain !
her wrongs -- might match against the paynim peer .
with regretful respect for the earnestness proved
while their soft bands her loving arms would cast
believed of discord by thy timely word
and just as i became assured
in the depth of the night not daring to let any one know
i ask'd with fear and trembling before your tale was told . "
he rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed .
thou , who the right hast aye pursued ,
but four celestials both your cares supplied .
his breath that died in hollow gusts away ,
adhere to , and call it " the tommy stafford stubble-
with tender love - suit -- at the suit of his tailor .
illinc totius florae , verisque , suique
that not one woman keeps her marriage vow .
over the brink of the crag of sense ,
where near the buckets ' tis the most declined
of speckled eggs the birdie sings
two hearts alike there seldom be . "
and ate the fruits and smelled the flowers ,
and both lamenting brought to tancred 's tent .
i wish they may -- in health to live ,
may purity be stamped upon his brow ,
for one mad , glad year of glorious youth ,
and when the faint corinthian hills were red
those arms his own . your spirit and your limbs
a high , clear music of eternal vows
( so should my heart a load of anguish lose )
where philip 's steps were led ,
the sturdy shepherds arm them for the fray .
belov'd by all who bids the jail farewell .
they 'll place a pair of bricks to mark our tomb ;
oh , beating heart of sweet alarm ,
across the water shooting into sight ;
your native worth , no tongue , no time arraigns ,
and such scant stores as yet the living few
through lives of men that fear not man
and of a knight the occasion sought to know ;
or by the wayside pool .
may win not more than they who toil and curse ?
passages in italics indicated by _ underscores _ .
here were men lying quelled by bitter death
and questioned in her innocent unbelief ,
whose flaming centre burneth
an ' heard the restless rattons squeak
the happy kingdom in myself
into the season of decay :
of trellis - work in long arcades ,
will point us under every sky
the other , blind , within her little room ,
he turned to the east his eye :
nature sees "                 robert burns
of those for whom we care not .
' twas garlanded with purest thought ,
nor ought beside would this day 's canto shew ;
and then what proper person can be partial
a thousand years are but a day .
thou art unhappy in this hopeless passion ,
( ll . 315 - 333 ) alas !   how rashly did the cursed fiend resolve to
i now must introduce to you
the women turned to teeming wives began
from the kentledge on the kelson
were borne to me by the women of my household . the greater part
i shall recover , dost thou tell me ,
fetching ; i had far rather fight than stay in my tent . "
hann kaus bjarki [ ' i ] m['a]la .
extinguish'd , not decay'd ;
i closed a bargin finally to take a feller runnin ' .
" with a speech as chaste and gentle ,
he should be known . with elevated fists
here comes the wind ,
you outhold so lovingly !
i seemed to catch of such a structure sight ;
and one .
we both fell silent , striving to recall
thought would not return . now , however , let it be as i say , and
and presently hear
so may thy silver streams beneath the tide ,
also , thy wise design . "
which opes its entrance at the faintest breath ,
spokeâ"though mine the ring of empire ,
our toil shall set this people upon earth 's purest height .
the flock has rested ,
brethren , rise ye !
yea , rather cast away , his costly load .
seven voyages of sinbad the sailor ; with coloured
of asia , stretching far , and faint descried !
the light and shadow played .
porque tú , ¡ oh dios ! le robaste
seest how the chariots in mad rivalry
thou , turnus , know'st too well , who first hast felt the feud .
humility , that thy best done is nought .
when o'er death 's ferry youth departs ,
and winter clasp the world -- as life the heart !
how to rest in full contentment ,
my closing lips , and hides my head in shades ;
in horrible destruction laid thus low ,
xenophon excellently feigned such another stratagem , performed by
i 've heard my gran'pap say
and he is where the holy angels are .
" in vallem egeriæ ; descendimus et speluncas
and young lampyris waves his plumes of gold ;
  however formidable the spanish armies are on paper , what we have
cleon fees a score of doctors ,
or in the cot with her ,
involuntary sparks of thought ,
and the thyme it is wither'd , and rue is in prime .
while dobbin , tamed by age and labour , stands
never will i be submissive
mak 's nae collieshangie wad fley a bit flee ,
the first winter which i did spend
and shrouded in its cerement of the snow ;
that fell asleep to long , long torment , and through thee ?
awoke by infant innocence !
that it might shade the guests at ranko ’s marriage ,
in anger and pride ,
it led out to another door , whereon a crimson stain
thy beauty holds the spell that wakes to life
some woodsmen found me , having heard the sound
nor how you raised your arms and cried ,
that in your justice you have heard enough
bursts in a blazing column to the clouds ;
the distant lake , fountains,--and mighty trees ,
but cottage , herd , or sheep - cote , none he saw--
( as i brush them away ) ,
ebbing its life away .
who gave the gentler moon to cheer
lights shine in the town .
between its tempters , rarely overthrown :
cough their own knell , while heedless of the sound
to the cave 's mouth he roll'd , and closed the gate
that might stir up reprisal in the dead .
thy dreams of bliss shall end in pain .
this little child , so white , so calm ,
and gordon never gave a hint ,
the men that live in west england
had scattered them asunder o'er the plain ,
that i have n't found these suffering folks before !
o mother earth ! thine arms will fondle her
the hair collected in the fire he throws .
o for a heart to love thee
with a murmuring ( whispering ) sound flowing aright .
by cool siloam 's shady rill
and i brought a half - fou ' o ' gude red goud ,
what earthly soil it had afore possest ;
does his creator 's power display ,
the misery and cold and pain .
and beautiful immortals pass their days in peace ,
changed -- shriller .   of a sudden , the clear moon
vice for it self : to him no temple stood
i wore in joy a radiant star ;
the notary with guittone and myself ,
" how changed that hector , who like jove of late
" since thou wilt not heed mine order ,
through every throbbing vein .
to trace down your ancestors ' name ;
and break upon thee in a flood of day .
and , like a ruined wall , the world around me
by which my guide , and i behind him close ,
to toll me back from thee to my sole self !
_ salvator mundi natus est . _
atrides ' hollow corselet , but the reed
i walked the lane which presently
a cluster of grapes--
lives here to honor him while art shall last .
two of a thousand things are disallow'd , i. 10 .
still in the river see the shallop floats .
wisely she knew the harmony of things ,
and the wretch , his true - born brother ,
liable to bring about its destruction .
till , living to so mean an end ,
and irnfried of thuringia , / a stately knight to see :
learned from the language of the bird
and the winds are still , and the crimson roses
his palace lost -- and to this day
sometimes she binds her hair , sometimes she lets it fall ,
hath each his several degree assign'd .
" what in the world are you doing ? " she demanded .
with hymns of praise , the sun on high
a noble youth , the helm beside ,
owlish and blinking creatures scrambled to hands and knees ;
de su tierra .
i do love i know not what , ii . 7 .
' how sweet the words of truth , breathed from the lips of love .
of martyred dorothea ,
prepared , that should conduct him to his home .
of the common people , he atones for grandeur by a bow .
you , a sparrow on the housetop lonely ,
is vibrant in the air . high - pitched and thin ,
thou'll break my heart , thou bonnie bird ,
turn ye and stand , and from his dreadful lot
yet th ' elysian halls are spacious ,
whistle blows , shrill , provocative -- telling surely
some shepherds ( unlike paris ) led to stare
here passes , repasses , and flits to and fro ,
but from a knotted lance , large , heavy , strong ,
and all the hero 's followers / who willing served alway .
and honoured him , and wrought into his heart
bright light to windward on the horizon 's verge ;
thou dost mock at fate and care ,
we mark'd , and from afar another light
high heaven , resistless in his varied sway ,
of strength and beauty in the golden grasp of an
and herds of howling wolves that stun the sailors ' ears .
` one in two ' , and ` two in one ' ; while she is referred to
two wings of flame against the white
girl , their gilded puissance ,
xli . but good aeneas , pondering through the night
for which i prayed ! not vainly hast thou turn'd
the immortal , incommunicable dream .
for , lo ! an army gathers around a standard clean ;
i 'll speed her up with my jades ;
the storm of evil -- christ in sorrow did
and the wind washes through the mountain - pines .
grateful that i , among the murmuring rest ,
what word , leiodes , grating to our ears
groaning heavily . and presently he spake among the
want a kind hand , which thy fixed eyes may close ,
on the midmost he is dying
wouldst thou buy god ? nay , simon , change thy tone ,
with his bright tead that flames with many a flake ,
gaed hoddin by their cottars ;
the other to a spirit turn'd , who near
and found myself outside the hill ,
who sang of " annie laurie . "
one by one and two by two ,
go home to sleep at his command ,
delivered it over to be worn by hector . nevertheless the end of
the net , from the boat 's prow with deftest hands
i 'd know him and shame him .
why are the gods by men betrayed ! '
hurled the pine - cones down upon him . " ]
and plump as ever these eyes descried ;
round thee , achilles , eager for the fray ,
and like a fallen star shone on her breast
the country round must at our mercy lie ;
“ others there are whose power more wide extends
and dolly sobbed at me , " they saw you , too ! "
a chime of laughter echoes in the hall ;
and men shall speak me kind , shall tell
prove to a world of brows down - bent
with sound celestial , with melodious lays :
keeps rugged guard thy waters o'er .
deum flecti sperare precando:--cease to hope that the decrees of
above the battle 's fiery storm ,
bot i algate am so besein ,
steered his vessel straight to land ;
this absolon down set him on his knees ,
through heaven , through earth , hosannas ring .
# heavy bass . #
celia , before her mirror bends ,
from fools and knaves in our parliament free ,
committed to his keeping , play'd the part
out of this you melt your glass
yon undistinguishable clump of trees
and he knocked and called " little pig , i pray ,
and hereupon my mind was so withdrawn
day is passing swiftly
but most with mantles folded round ,
a line that saints could wish to blot ,
but mirth is turned to melancholy ,
i can get used to the dreary hush ,
the white enshrouding childhood raise
he bade them banish , and in him confide
and the lady 's beauty , her worst intent . )
triviality , and the kind of partial blindness which belong to
" men have forgotten how much blood it costs . "
footsteps gently ascending , mystical breezes wafted soft and low ,
in his need and pain forsaken
in the morning gleam as the tide went down ,
in the autumn at last i am alone .
asked the friendless , asked the homeless
and then she turn'd to the preacher
thy wish'd return . i disapprove alike
and to the fosses came all that the land
his servants , oxen , horses , cows--
what devil made me do it
his gilded shrine lies open to the air ;
these shone in the sky , and the pail by the wall
i had not lived in vain .
now in the branching chair of some tall tree
flutter in the breeze
shall haunt and sing and hide her nest ;
you in any of your old bachelor , sluggardly ,
blighting all we breathe upon !
cursed the insensate longing for life in the heart of a sick old
and crowd full canvas ; and the port is won .
else men are made their deodands .
to see us greet and kiss at last .
or lightning clouds that burst in rain .
and i know that the curse of the treason is worse
there was another meaning in these gifts ;
lanificam pensis imposuisse manum .
sleeping safe on the bosom of the plain ,
amongst the shadows of our mortal world ,
that should you stir , we and our altars too
where the founts of nectar run :
looks down upon the subject plain —
delight in it ; and it is my pleasure , that thou tell that which
cried they , " can such authority be found ?
with wondering eyes the hero she survey'd ,
and free you from your load of clay : "
is like the watcher by a sick man 's bed
then red - hair'd rollo , fierce advancing cri'd,--
but the boston maid smiles courteouslee ,
to humor them , he did the same
my clown is going , and the tricksey three
past or question me about the future .
ten thousand boroughs , dreaming peace , awake .
the rebellious shall swing , but be you ne'er afraid .
spreads o'er the coast and scents the tainted gales ;
o god , who art alone the life and light
if duly weigh'd , if rationally seen ,
so nature of mind must be corporeal , since
st . ambrose melted down the sacred plate,--
if heaven more generous gifts deny ,
be drinkelees for alwey , as i gesse ;
which i new pay as if not paid before :
pleasure with dry lips , and pain that walks by night ;
that soul beatified could never lie ,
and they waved like fans in a hall of stone
a small injury to the arm ,
do you want the jingle of rhythm and rhyme ?
her castle , proof to hostile powers ,
apart from her seemed worse than death to me .
( _ here ends that sarga of the gîta govinda entitled _
strained in eagerness his vision ,
sir siegfried strongly seized him , and cast a rope around ,
that in the bay of portugall had fought ;
told the self exile of the parted lord ;
with work , he hardly printed black behind
omniscient thought .   true is , less firmly arm'd ,
and morn and eve around their altars bend
_ this _ gives our gratitude to glow
rising in the buggy as he spoke , and peering eagerly
i ' the midst -- the heart of france , more justly say .
among the silent , dark array
and now pomp the peaceful kings appear :
and gods unascertainable as these--
" and susan price can marry whom she will ,
had he been there ,
escape is none ; since so hath jove decreed ,
however , long s 's have been transcribed as modern s 's .
yes , the brook , the sebowisha ,
to every side their way they made .
in vain ! for nowhere is thy flower fit , o maker !
do'n de steep ol' mo'nta'n side
the pelting hail and riving blast .
in silence , wet his cheek , and new - born faith ,
" lodge where you must , drink small - beer where you can ,
i see my little grandchildren a - romping round my knee ;
mantled in woven gold , with gems inchas'd ,
a host of bloody centuries lie prone
each shall join to help the others ,
with her shadowy beams ,
nature calls thee not her own .
how vainly pants , the human soul divine !
oh ! his wit shone like crystal!--his knowledge profound
in lasting safety from the father 's power ! "
their points of contact , and swift counterchange ;
twelve ships from salamis with ajax came ,
" proclaim that heaven took back the saint it gave;--
“ most rich was pierus their sire ; to him
and coast pachynus , tho ' with more delay ,
my motherhood the fruits of my first sin .
in the sapphire west the eve yet lingered ,
warm and soft with young desires ,
even for our love of old ,
" that evil loveliness must die ! "
thy soldiers , healthy and at ease ? ”
called the people to the conflict ,
lockhart , john gibson , vol . iii . , 171 .
and all these dreams but wearied me the more .
which shall not whelm me , let me not have worn
they called him " atheistical , "
to whom , borne down by peril , thy quaking soul would pray .
and purple as their shadows on the grass .
for lapse of water , swell of breeze ,
and eye of violets while they breathe ;
he wo n't make the fact that they 're rightfully his
i moste come ; for whider sholde i goon ,
by modest awe , nor fear reproof :
peneus , iii ; v.
let others here their hopes and wishes end ,
the ceaseless penance of this gentle maid .
my breast thy temple , and my heart thy shrine !
uphung the spear , unbent the bow ,
_ the wise men came to greet him with their gifts of myrrh
as if it wished to see her beauty too--
sons of the hermits , and their peers ,
i will not give my vineyard unto thee .
with limbs by summer 's heat and toil oppressed ;
happiness has fled from me forever . the prayer which i make
out into the field the peasant goes ,
and broke his sword in splinters three ,
et grauis autumni redeat fetura parentis .
mira que sólo te resta ,
' tis better to have tossed ,
and that gernando 's friends would venge the wrong ,
this he himself had for some time believed .
the singin ' lintie on the brae ,
why , on itself with worn beak having prey'd ,
than all invective is his bold harangue ,
and i do my bravest smiling and i feign a
would tarry not the wintry day,--
in frowning espionage , troubling the sleep
a cause , which on a needful day
and one full rose alone is seen ,
il a passe , le sieur etienne ;
and let thy brother feel for one
" it is not now as in old days
luxury .
when high in their murmurous arches
to lighten that policeman 's woes ,
the evil that men do lives after them ;
his buckler -- on the madman would break in )
" one can not be thinking all day of such matters !
now to the lord sing praises ,
for a day o'er lake was steering ,
where the old plain men have rosy faces ,
and law in wales to be complete
delight is changeful as the hue
met me betimes this morning tide ,
an even mexico .
rose tow'rds him from the place where first it was ,
and there alone , amid the beaming
but thou art e'er the same--
that was upgathered in the cloudless aspect
old churchyards stuffed with buried crimes ,
when the road cross'd ; and sometimes , when
our god is good .
who can not flatter , and detest who can ,
throbbed with the anguish of her love no more .
and left us nothing to believe in , worth
or garden tempting with forbidden fruit .
yet once , i mind me , smith was forced to stay
tho ' i but a poor cobbler be ,
the cronies o ' langsyne .
within his breast . there firm shall we remain ;
the lowly lesson of content :
no costly drugs of araby defile ,
cities from out their sepulchres : men bled
of ninety leagues , i will not fail .
and mindful of revenge ; for from beneath
the starting coursers tremble with affright ;
" would this be world enough for thee?"--
de oro y de luz labradas ,
than peter the eater ,
wordsworth 's reputation . his fame belongs to another age , and can
so i would have had her stand and grieve ,
an ' still dead set , in spite uv bumps ' e 's got ,
when in this land the prince arrives ,
through the flats of hades where the dreary shade is ,
whether in the heat of battle ,
the hour moves forward .
by thy guiding mercy sent ,
" no , " said the worthy bishop , " no ;
the devil indeed has taught the art ;
but silly we , like foolish children , rest
as he scatter'd dismay o'er the smiling earth ;
to earth each gleaming ornament .
he never should enjoy a sweet revenge . "
vêtu d'une peau de girafe .
how can i leave my former happy life
then had his sepulchre risen
an echo to my heart that sobbing calls for you alone .
carelessly passing with your robes afloat,--
afloat in splendour , panoplied in light -- the arch - pontifical sun !
" but merlin ? " the man stammered ; " merlin ? merlin?"--
a sad but heavenly smile a moment stirr'd ,
so divinely -- oh , dolly ! between you and i ,
an ' sup all t ' afternoon .
he came , and sadly went along the sand ,
' n ' it tilts all ways by sunday .
in many ways than others of my friends ,
ar e thū ' sa -- a spring " where the swine of eumaios ate ' abundance
are hidden behind the blue mantle
crawling up from the dampness and darkness of clay
and lays and chants inflected
and over soft brown woods , limpid , serene ,
the widows , wives , an ' a ' may bless him
nor rumour from wild lands afar ,
i think ye hardly know the tender rhyme
upon the ramparts , bristling thick with spears .
with hope , and faith , and gratitude , and joy .
knows not rogero , nor rogero her .
but i 'll not venture in the drift
he called the worthies then , and spake them so :
guess it would n't break my heart ;
to see her grandmother in london town .
foliage , pure and disposed to mount unto the stars .
and lived our lives as simply
_ hans _ [ _ half to himself _ ] . see , see !
_ clootie _ , a familiar name for the devil .
calls thee its master , to have courted death
spoiled of life , so scathed had left him
thereupon young ilmarinen ,
and with his sultry breath infects the sky ;
which neither listlessness , nor mad endeavour ,
" stewed up here as we 've been
merry lark                   hartley coleridge
fowlers with their snares concealed ;
that murmur , soon replies , god doth not need
then falls , betrayed by shifting shells , and lands
round its staff ' tis drooping dreary ;
a single , vulgar star leers from the sky
occasion seems to have been an apprehension lest , from the
and hoary age assails him , by his ain fireside ,
in that chamber over the gate ,
at home , far more than ever yet was love--
through the eyelet of the needle ,
forget , nor from thy father 's praise disjoin .
let him come to the fire ,
into green waves the prairie 's grassy lake ,
' twixt banks , on either side , painted with spring ,
and should the event verify thy report ,
and innocent way , for i had spurned aside
to the lodge came wild and wailing ,
there sophy tight , a lassie bright ,
a long , vast hall , then up a flight of stairs
the robber book we read by turns
they marked it with the red cross to the fall ,
and by the shore of its most famous lake ;
they sought her baith by bower and ha ' ;
for a sliver by which he may fasten a quibble
we did but keep you surety for our son ,
no word . rich plate that rays ,
conceals his avarice by his malice .   addison had hinted his
from morn till night ! i did not dare
thuster nyth and comz the day
that 's the kind of little girl
his voice was thunder in the cheer ;
veiling proud sorrow with his iron hand .
wealth , treasures of every hue
when the lessons and tasks are all ended ,
we have to hurry at the touch of fate ;
against the enemy yet we hold,--
his steadfast hope from self has turned away ,
of one good man , with stately march and slow ,
who for the same him fowlie did entreate ;
so away at speed through the whispering pines
the fair queen 's dreaded footsteps drawing near ;
next day the friends prepared again to start
a fragrant rose forever dear .
her fair tresses seemly binding
insect and bird
who , biting , in the manner ran along
mixed with the faith that brought all gods to birth
and is thy heart so strong
as skiffs that skim adown the tide , when silver waves are fair ,
to seize the spanish main ;
_ to a gaelic air . _
men sen such love sielde in pes ,
over meads and over marshes ,
down to this habitable , which returnes
when i had attained this station ,
two on my left to bless me stand ;
in glittering weed accoutred , of high - born knights and proud .
to love that well , which thou must leave ere long .
youth and beauty learnèd in all delight ,
minute delineations of character
so generous is orlando 's heart , he base
though oft we faint and falter on the way ,
unfaltering , watching for the end , there creeps
fairly starting from his head .
the doghter of king priamus ,
with his plumes and tufts of swan 's down ,
open and manifest to me
flood !   care well for every creature until i shall cause food to
riven asunder , what time a gathered blast
of canopy reposing , fame is won ,
and , though none know it , he is wholly blest .
heard the curtain of the doorway
but prudently conceal'd the tidings , so
gazes with delight upon the , beautiful lady who strengthens thee
with its adder - bitten root ,
i 've not yet fixed it .   but i must soon . "
to be the mayor of some poor paltry town ;
ballads and songs by unknown authors . 17th cent .
and tables spread with dainty food ,
and the desolate hiawatha ,
no reveller had ever dipp'd a chin
o human creatures , born to soar aloft ,
pedasus and lyrnessus ; but i ' scaped
" for god of these his attributes is made . "--
above them their dessert grew on its vine ,
erect and stern , in his own memories lapt ,
and not on paper leaves nor leaves of stone ;
" hell - hound ! by thee my child 's devoured ! "
the green earth takes the plow .
whatever contacts , raptures , pains or hopes
from many a lonely hamlet ,
feels for hilt and brand ,
to rose - colored extinction .
dead priest ! bless from amid the blest ,
be astonishment mixed with anger ; its hair became erect ; in
we have enjoyed beneath thy dome ,
when to the theatre the women run
come hither lad , and answer for't ,
how i would that i had thy winging--
to arms , to arms ! the fierce virago cries ,
beside the lake , beneath the trees ,
may find as dear a nurse at need ,
by hands unseen ; and even as he said
she is prettier far , though i do n't like her home .
clearness more pure and thoughts , victory gaining
but let me stay here , for i know you will not bring one of them
the " stars and stripes " my cousin rears ,
their lord and leader dead , the crowd
a leveller ! does the empire grudge
it is the far eternal shore ,
gods of my fathers ! o preserve to - day
that she scarce one in twenty sees
with love 's brightest passion - flowers .
i leave thine op'ning charms , o spring ,
rome with two neros and a caius cursed ;
is down on the minister 's wife .
the time the city and his home between ,
chilling the saucy birds within their nests ;
through mutual wrath , whom by persuasive speech
they 're the funniest , cutest little elfin men ,
’ gainst thy hand . come ! my longing pinnace waits
or bid it languish quite away ,
a thousand chiefs their steeds bestrode ,
none , none descends into himself , to find
is all my spare and simple treat :
a good fellow to have his concubine
o hari , do not wound them with your nails , be wise in love .
hereafter , who , correcting , should translate .
and the bronze point went clean through it . he fell as an oak , or
in the place where he was born .
the eye uplifted from his lurid shade .
with the rollers in measureless onset ,
an ' the dew on flower an ' tree
sing oak , and ash , and thorn , good sirs
whan he a whyle his glas hath loken than
" my bride , my bride , my lone soul 's best beloved ,
does first his scepter , then himself , in solemne tribute pay .
and fairy laughter all the summer day .
tell him , thyrsis , what th ' hast seen .
no being can be thought t ' exist apart
and nought was so bright as its golden sheen ;
where , mid tall palms , the cane - roofed home is seen ,
at this shy hour
the resolution of p. t. to proclaim his own disgrace was less
gaily , to the hand expert with sail and oar
the joy of flight , the perfumed waft
till the great king , without a ransom paid ,
forget not ! o , forget not this ,
of eden , where delicious paradise ,
lay it by in some sacred deposit
seiz'd on the golden prize . proud with the spoil ,
strove with the sun , and in a place , where fresh
give as i will , i can not give you sight
inseparable now , the truth and lie ;
should ever be those blood - hounds , from whose wild
but rati saw not , for she swooned away ;
the lady of my love , may be .
ah ! yet doth beauty , like a dial hand ,
a stormy sea before her,--
and never , when our sabres met ,
talk on , who think the songster of limoges
over the pass the voices one by one
some banished lover , or some captive maid ;
bark at detractors .   he may walk or lie .
a great tidal sea is each loch ,
of thinges hath , as it is hir committed
on our wine - flask ,
as dr . watson 's famous foil,--
since to appearance his intention is
you took the lilt from my carefree life ,
“ now thou may’st see , my lady love ,
shall sing for me .
thou mad'st me thine that day ,
such inconsistent things are love and shame !
virg . geor . iii .
but still the watch - house made amends ,
as with its fringe of summer flowers . afar ,
if it be so , i have no doubt ,
and grappled at the fell , as one who mounts ,
i know it well , our manly years
sarcastically , in allusion to achilles being born of thetis ,
evadne , was thy flight ?
márícha as his hand he pressed :
  manto is the only daughter of tiresias , who is mentioned by
and to cebriones , his brother , call'd ,
loud roars the wild , inconstant blast ,
" come over the meadows with me , and play ,
it is gentle and weak ,
sound , humbug , all your hollowest drums ,
behold endured by others , heaped on thee ,
then enid waited pale and sorrowful ,
an ' when they wo n't loose up their talk
this song is mine .
and therefore shall not moses , though of god
rowl up an ’ put your money down
what say you ? a _ pasty _ ! it shall and it must ,
they roll in the inns , with rounded guts , and hearts
when my narcotic spell has wrought
and saw the ruddy roses on his cheek ,
and the chill lips can not move
not now ! not now !
within the same arena where they see
hurts no one worse than thou
they dug no ditch , and made no fence ,
my last year 's friends together .
they break into our paradise ,
incontynent was it tourned in to golde
an uproar shook the thing . a thousand swords
felt the mighty aid of magic ,
and merry revel hold .
each bush with bloom , in snow commemorative .
the sacred mistletoe !
else but poets .   nay , let any history he brought that can say any
chaugham told them of his parents
its wings are almost free -- its home , its harbour found ,
and they were stronger hands than mine
by this i reached the roof - top , whence in vain
the silence of the earth ; and from the warm
take her up instantly ,
to the northland cold and dreary ;
hath reared these venerable columns , thou
where upward is the visible aim ,
for ruth that such a cruel fate on turnus ' head should fall .
and though i weep because those sails are tattered ,
something that i did not know
the lance for janishkisgan 's hand ;
the expense of spirit in a waste of shame
mau glwyf a mowrnwyf murniad , huno heb
to grateful twilight ( for night comes not there
floats , as they pass , fann'd with unnumber'd plumes :
grandma , with averted head ,
will shrink from it shudderingly ,
ho ! alms for the hunters ! or never again
yet doo not see their owne unhappines .
" to thee , sweet eden ! how dark and sad
a husband and a wife . "
love makes his sign , and by no other road
' to him heaven opens a portal ,
before the sun has dipped behind those trees .
brave menelaus pitied them in their fall , and made his way to the
a vine her forehead girds ; the nimble deer
she , with a wistful glance at rose--
scarce ten miles distant , on the banks of seine ;
no strength in my poor foot is found ;
the other makes the woods resound
rods , poles or perches . . . derived from greek
put the brishwood back again -- and they 'll be gone next day !
she had not wept till that assuaging prayer ....
and grave - cold lips my fervid kisses stay .
thy wish , exactly to thy hearts desire .
her deck , once red with heroes ' blood ,
to the swinging and the ringing
feeding
mute and amazed , i at the broken wall
protects the lingering dewdrop from the sun .
the lord of new - created light
with heavenly thoughts , farre above humane skil ,
griefe carueth deepest , if it come from th'hart .
and up the children jump ;
whilst fruitful crops rise by their barren side ,
so suddenly from good to better , time
and then -- two shadows passed against the west ,
where destiny with men for pieces plays :
the heav'nly fires ; over the tent a cloud
her beauteous form reflected clear below ,
which heedless men pursue in vain ,
tossing their lovely dews ,
for she that time in sleep would waste and wear ;
" what a storm there fell last night ,
wild is thy lay and loud ,
which weel she fa 's to wear ,
and one would not have had him do otherwise .
what mouth to mouth tells in a kiss ,
over all in his nature !   he answer'd that gaze
does herbert 's " pearl " seem the true pearl to thee ?
and on latinus biddeth them in weed of war to wend ;
on lids which no sorrow cumbers .
half dream , swooping high , scarcely seen , chiefly faith ?
the lone enthusiast oft would take his way ,
disease or deeath , a kind releef ,
with love and sonly courtesies .
" the eyes of your fierce soldiery , i should be
dunted , throbbed , beat .
of parnassus stirr'd my blood ,
beside her i 'll be--
swiftly flew the long - eared herald ,
oh ! how the patient nazarene must bend
tiber swift and liris slow
fiercely flew at him where he stood .
where he was lord , what time was overthrown
willing to see the foule that did bestowe
such tales find ready credence .
a glorious apparition , had not doubt
into streams of silver been melted ,
lives in the bronze and marble that we raise ,
should mankind dwell
and answer , echoes , answer , dying , dying , dying .
and you will come to a wilderness
of those bright revellers and that graceful sweep
father will come to thee soon ;
collects the waters and supplies the clouds .
i feel so lonely ,
and frost it freezeth on every hill ,
to slay the very seeds of fear and doubt ,
and far o'er many a land was known to fame .
and no such music on the hills and plains
( which the soul 's ill affection doth disuse ,
and took me up .   as one , who , while he works ,
if you 've ever snigged the washin ' from the line ,
a pullet won the fox ; a thistle
and distempered being of mine .
simple folk that christ loved --
what moves thee , if the senses stir not ?   light
fit music for a prophet 's soul -
" you ask me to tell you the story
spring bloom and autumn blaze of boundless groves .
he that doth suspect does haste
the golden haunts , burned by the midday sun ;
by ashen roots the violets blow .
for whether , that he be lefe or lothe
“ the strength of greece , by exile or by death .
weak nature no such power doth know :
ther travels telling,--whoor they 'd been ,
and with his well - drawn bow at last
left the warm precincts of the cheerful day ,
a lady came , and thus bespake me : " i
he knows how to wheedle and rivet a vote ;
and if the immortal dead can truly speak ,
from me far off , with others all too near .
thou'lt weep,--poor martyr'd one!--by stealth ,
they gave thee love who measured out thy skies ,
where the toad and the newt encamp,--
cólera , impetuoso torbellino :
their rising rage patroclus ’ breath inspires ,
i hear you make some cheery old remark--
por los visos y celajes
he sigh'd and knew not what to do ;
who light ' twixt truth and intellect shall be .
bajó la noche en tanto . de la esfera
for all its peace .
shadow'd his humours -- smiled in him or frown'd ;
they never heard him once complain or even heave a sigh !
that living person conscious and supreme ,
disputing feebly with the frogs
high - fed with corn , his own swift - footed steeds ,
in a blue aureole !
fair annie served the lang tables
_ zerah . _             temple and tower ,
thus muste a gode clerke vnto a foule enclyne
our lips shook , sad as lips in hell ;
but ah ! if you , my summer , should grow waste ,
aught unsavory or unclean
but none beside me , or few others , live
striving to do sugríva ’s will
could not cheer her gloom ;
they sit all night at ombre ,
greges et ipsos claudit armentalium
princes , my suitors ! since the noble chief
and so at last he came , led on by her
o jonathan , jonathan ! deadly the sin
boccaccio tells a story of him in the decameron , giorn . i. nov .
the people told him :
and some we found by courtesy
þys watȝ cryed & knawen i{n } cort als fast ,
he spoke , and transport fill’d tydides ’ heart ;
i pass'd , as i remember , till my view
home with our ships , and leave this mighty chief
to the glimmering ice of his ghastly feet .
then came theophilus to dorothy ,
no carriage at the gate .
and that lost lover knew the charms
but , if this be the purpose of thine heart
for you wot full little what a man he is .
that i took pity on him and obeyed ,
and now he treads the stars .
for all within these boundaries is full
shall not be taxed for me ! "
like love ballyragging strife ;
shall vanish as a cloud before the wind ;
" stop a moment , dear sir , and look not so rueful ,
their love , unheard of any , to proclaim .
was i in no wise startled . so recline
in vain we heave for breath ; in vain we cry ;
quickly sows the barley kernels ,
but the son of alknomook can never complain .
and fats herself with public miseries . ]
so also , o ye gods , ye envy me
but there 's a danger that its brilliance may obscure the rest ,
forms below
the lotus - eyed , the beauteous boy ,
there 's a holier chase in your view ;
parlent d'une ville noyee ,
let to infinity the thread extend ,
he suffered for the ransom of the dear redeemer 's grave ,
kindles in clothes a wantonness :
with treasons past perplex’d , and present cares ;
not honour ’s law , not friendship ’s debt ,
i had determined that i would
that they were welnigh slaine for loue at length :
vanquish'd on lofty gargarus , his spouse
( certain to be refus'd ) what erst they feard ;
and merry men are we .
flash'd up effulgence , as they glided on
not so , however ; though his food was scant ,
o come , thy weary limbs relieve ,
another and another cup to drown
he in righteous indignation -- smote me with this awful curse :
and to a perfecter end , guideth with softness its growth ,
if he had lived this hundred year ,
two days and nights , among the mighty waves
john ! come and we d , and we 'll drive care away !
they a mixt sound of blows and outcries hear ,
goosey , goosey , gander ,
not now , o father ! now it mounts , it flies ,
even such a man as seemed to him meet .
so it then made for the poor dead
say what you please , but from day - break
above the briars and roses
a little longer still , ere heaven unroll
sick with amazement ,
insect and bird and tree and flower--
that lie to - morrow in the street and mart .
capt . g. ( desperately . ) by all means dictate .
wastes in a double flame ,
no wo nor care can cause suche to beware
invisible and clothed like the air ,
take heed !
may rest in peace who like a gull goes up and down the sea .
wal , i jest gut 'em into line , an ' druv 'em on afore me ,
i give thine asking ; conquered now i yield me , and am glad :
whom the seas gave , all earth , all earth embraced ;
god loves from whole to parts : but human soul
there are lands where manly toil
upon the morwe his swevene tolde
that grew from a moonbeam - ray ,
one treadle moves a thousand lines ,
to snatch some hours ' refreshing rest ,
over the hills to march away ,
and the lank nomads of the wandering west ,
_ he that is hurt seeks help _ : sin is the wound ;
lend him thine own ; nor shall i be less fit
and how he had been toss'd , he scarce knew whither :
all life ; and shaping earthly ends ,
honey - brewed in great abundance ,
" proclaim destruction , and proclaim from me :
he seeks me !
by the trunk she is limping and hopping ,
from wild mongolia and the arabian wastes ;
never elated , while one man 's oppressed ;
hear now me also , on whose aching heart
her kingdom was not bacon , no , nor
the sentence quoted by wakefield was copied by bolingbroke from
so raghu ’s son in duty trained
all the world wonder'd .
the reverent pilgrims , countless , clustering came ;
i would not damp , but to secure thy joys .
thy familiar fields amid ;
no word in reply his comrade spoke ,
with honey'd lips enamour'd woodbines meet ,
the things whose own peculiar stamp they bear .
but it thrilled me quite
canto ii . proem.--ascent to the moon.--the cause of spots on the
if another word you utter ,
and a weakling , or it may be i am too young , and have as
o beauteous picket fence , can i not draw
in the spring ; and in the fall
a sudden darkness fills the room ,
and tantalizes long ; at last he drinks ,
in the warm blush of evening shone ;
fit place for men to lie in wait unseen .
how at first i acquainted became
( did you think it was in the white or gray stone ? or the lines of
eternal forces
since first to you the land i sold
prec .   yes , that i love thee , as the good love heaven ;
and there was n't a bit of green in his eye !
were living , who against apollo 's self
thy saints proclaim thee king ; and thy delay
imploring the high lord , in so great strife ,
and the sword shall to glory restore us .
the wave complained:--
like echoes of an antenatal dream.{6 }
now ye will jeopard your lives for a song ,
by judges first , then under kings ; of whom
if you feel it a pleasure to talk to the flow'rs
and she , the mother of thy boys ,
our vessel lay . here , friendless , we implored
o lily bursting white ,
then leaf , and flower , and falless fruit
ne diu taceat procax
but i sank not in the marshes ,
below grass swells a velvet hill ,
i must move on ; but oh , the way !
seen the head of this sea - monster .
creeping rot in the west of europe.--they make it indirectly
but when these larger lives have flown
for other nature , thus the soul and mind ,
it is only fate 's great fencing master
tea is like the east he grows in ,
that fills my heart with sadness !
whether his mother would let him or no .
gold light across the golden coomb ;
and , from the summit of that craggy mound ,
peace let the dew send !
deeds . so for seven whole years i abode with their king ,
should think themselves too small to cool
so , let the blue lump poise between my knees ,
the pumps , and there were four feet water found .
life wriggles in and out
his heart went out within him , like a spark
have oft withstood assailing war ,
for the freedom of the earth .
and echo , from the vales , the tuneful voice rebound .
by the powers of darkness was given , she came ,
with the iron of some black thought .
incussit foliis , sive diespiter
then remember , wherever your goblet is crowned ,
" _ nor yet too wide .
when in the evening you went to the cow - shed with the lighted
but ne'er again gar ' t blush sae sair
nor brighter land had a cause so grand ,
full soon your love was leapt from me ,
their education often makes ,
and when at last the hunted bison tires ,
" so that when thou hearest the high god 's name ,
i may walk to the end of the garden
let us bring our blossoms , too ,
doubt 's mournful fist its fingers opes , while we d
at early dawn there sounded sweet flute and trumpet - clang ;
and all the pleasing landscape fades away .
" rempar , " from " remparer , " to fortify .
the falling trophies of your conquest fair ?
when the shy star goes forth in heaven
which the world will harken and know ;
thou hast revealed ; those chiefly , which concern
old wine ? never .
thou , retire thee to thy own white dwelling !
he plac’d for the door ’s security ,
that while these matrons sigh ,
in london , that the pirate drake was now
echoed through court and corridor .
she is the darling of my heart ,
he bang'd t ' poor woman
and the lot in the helm may leap
deny my god !   oh life was very sweet !
th ' adventurous youth was borne ; back to the east ,
are fashioned for the place of the baptisers ,
leaving the haven - side , he turn'd his steps
apollo heard , and pity touch'd his heart ,
oh , i 'd give all this world away
even as he strode like a pestilence ,
marked how he grew with ripening age
in the hoarse oaths that kept our courage straight ;
seizing the first , who had the name learchus ,
then off she hies , but with a prayer
say any dream of all the dreams that drift and
" we 're going to be married
whither away so fast
it robs us of our food , man ,
in circle after circle about you
slowly , as then , his bounteous hand
« the memory of our love shall bridge the ages .
as still as still could be ,
ross , david macdonald .
he rose to do what might be done .
epítetos crueles ) ;
new england number four 's our comp'ny ,
and sparkles in the crystal wells ,
on women fit for conception i start bigger and nimbler babes .
here 's the violet 's modest blue ,
yet lay by hat and wig ,
fulfilled , as the year came round and the seasons returned ,
midway in some enthusiast 's song ,
that earthly darkness teemed with gibbering ghosts
thou return with the joyful assurance the king liveth yet ,
as they rode on the way ,
welcome , sweet may !
e'en as a sleep breaks off , if suddenly
and he 's been looking late so old and grey .
during his feud with landgrave fritz the bitten ,
to render her conception vain ,
sestri and chiaveri descends a beautiful stream , and of its
blood , and the boomps on that head of um ! '   and
through heart and bone ;
as feminine in her degree ,
his face that lightens all , what time the fly
but by the circling blades , and furious blows ,
dan , dan ,
and under us three spirits came , of whom
of the infant sight ?
my peggy is a young thing ,
so noiselessly , that our souls are open wide ,
so saw i fluctuate in successive change
that am come to beg pardon for him and for mee .
let us woo in peace the maiden ,
christus , going up the mountain .
or be well forgotten , there .
because i hear and do not understand ,
though mine the sweat and danger of the day .
there is ever a song somewhere , my dear .
of victory behold the latest feast ,
and she i cherish'd turn'd her wheel
( see the memoirs of sully ) to pan , the great toe
sport'st in the gilt plaits of his beams ,
the gracious seasons ’ joy and pride ,
mother black bear , gaunt and hard chased ,
thus is he commun as the strete ,
born of a primal atom - dance .
not tho ' the soldier knew
the ashes at thy feet . behold and see
a plotting mask'd dissimulating life;--
but never an answer came from the wood ,
beneath a blossoming lime ,
fate , bear our shipwrecked fortunes past the bounds
it was your light show'd me the way .
you are a fellow - townsman of mine ,
thus speaks mrs . browning .
by their well - fitted guerdon .   of the five ,
" where is the british navy -- is it staying in the harbours ?
and four and twenty elders , clothed in white ,
suited both for bill and muzzle .
a goodly hall hung round with gold ,
i was taught to be forgiving ,
a manifold god fast - bound as with iron of adverse things .
and how he grew through childhood 's grace ,
it endeavoured also , by acting on individual character , to effect
never again to lose ! come , first of men !
so that where'er they chuse to show 'em ,
that breaks and , sighing , dies ?
or olive - bough from some wild tree
all for the deadly sin of gluttony ,
from sorrows and replete with joys ;
beyond all bounds , and there is none can vie with him in prowess "
and having in his love a quick remembrance
that i beheld both of those blessed lights ,
that take more pains , and trust him less
i mai noght stonde in that degre ;
a freight came by , the line grew colder ,
the storm has gone over me , and i lie like one of those old
her own brood lost or dead , lent her fierce teat
" show me first your penny ; "
dat wus always on de jump ;
the ~foam~ is not the ~wave~ ;
' twas blithesome and blissful to be ,
the twinkling heavens overspread ,
with envy glare , with malice gloat ,
remembrance of those days may grieve thee sore .
yet there is sadness in thy soft caress ,
and weren bothe of on assent ,
then we came to a valley more tropical far
we 'll keep it spite of ills .
wi ' sailor lads a dancin ' heel - an'-toe ,
authority permitted .   but do thou
this note is quoted from whitaker.--ed .
and slowly creeping
of their transgression , such hath been my lot . "
inhelde , and do me shewe of thy swetnesse . --
on a headland jutting seaward ,
that calls duty pleasure ? what an if they make merry , saying
there king triśanku , far renowned ,
mr . child finds the first published version of " the grand old
so liebt die lerche
to set its struggling passion free
but wafted o'er the icy flood
o friedenswunder ! wie still die stadt !
and by some small signs he well can guess
god with the gods of the burning tree
but i may kneel without -- the star still waits
could it be known what they discreetly blot .
bot whanne he berth lowest the seil ,
doth more and better execution ,
his will , and in the silence of our spirits ,
( 3 )   " wishing - rod " , a magic device for discovering buried
but teach equality
warm cherish'd ev'ry floweret 's birth ,
no hope of gilded spurs to - day .
' how does he do ? what hopes?'--shall turn away ,
men come and go ; tides rise and fall ;
the warrior knew , and , while yet distant , scanned
while passion fires , or kindred sorrows fall ,
with the day sometimes at dawning —
and i could hardly eat my lunch next day ,
whenever teuton airmen
the liquid fall of some loved emphasis ;
to her the prize of beauty , thee of wit .
all the fays we all have known ?
beneath the dreadful catafalque of the dark .
to gaze on chitrakúṭa ’s hill ,
i die in the hope of soon meeting again
faces bright ;
my vacant being with far meanings whose
whom crete from all her hundred cities sent :
him they see an oak in bud ,
stanza xii . line 2 .
where thou canst hide from dawning 's garish hour--
then i sing the wild song it once was rapture to hear
memory of them or of their writings could endure so long as to
" now swift i waved my falchion o'er the blood ;
noteth , not only in one place alone ,
but for this time it ill ordained was ,
in blue brazilian skies ;
and he found her with his three .
these falls do n't always kill .
thou wert a moment since , and other garments thou hast , and
in the wood he worked upon it ,
no , no ! that heart is only mine
appropriate to his age ;
and take to interests altogether new .
fled was the land , and towns on land that stood ,
ye gods , with what agility he dives !
so will i ride a - hunting / the wild bear and the boar
he should attend his son down to the sea .
and she 's calld young bicham one word by .
" ' ow are yeh on a little gamble , kid ? "
and goddes love hadde ywrought ,
" the dancers quick and quicker flew "
as many objects as the eye ?
caeruleus proteus , magnum qui piscibus aequor
and reverenced are the tears they shed ,
look back o'er ages , ere unto the stake fast
skilful in the deeds of death--
was drunk and weary from the fight ,
then melts the mass . all these are vanities ,
and green is the grass on the soil
there is no wisdom
legends of wonder , the wide - hearted king ;
of their great passion that has filled the spheres .
what more to wait for , having known the worst ?
and glorious gifts he adds withal to every duke of man :
sha'da , the pelican
whiche came by danythys cursed auowtry
then left , nor bradamant through greenwood shade
schol . and hesych . t. ii . p. 186 , and p. 1266 . others understand
with virgin step , and bashful hand ,
have moved my laughter , oh , how oft my spleen . ' martin .
and ' tis wholesome food the glugs have got ,
through that knowledge of god of which the soul was capable , and
the sudden and gorgeous drama , the sunny and ample lands ,
and made a show of stuck on temple bar
far apart appear his eyeballs ,
swaying softly to and fro
he bade the folk that wrought his will
thet i sot out to tramp myself in tune ,
how they served the lord of glory ,
gone from me , gone from me !
there is the genuine silver ore ,
till they strike up marches henceforth triumphant and onward ,
penned & portrayed
and trouble the skies
all around him was calm , but within him commotion and conflict ,
and the crisp hissing waves closed round
foundry . ]
i could quiet your herds
for all the hours ,
thou that tam'st tigers , and fierce storms , that rise ,
fled like hushed horrors fly from light
down the old crook - road roun ' the hill .
winged by this arm ’s impetuous might
" to thy priests ' commands give ear !
till having sail'd through life 's tempestuous sea ,
has laid my leaf full low , o !
which _ now _ , assailed by locke 's , expire again .
priapus , wrongly left for dead ,
a lattice , ' neath which mignonette
o ! welcome , lovely summer ,
decided in favour of hercules , was changed . ambracia was on the
the fount was drained that opened first ;
wi ' quaffing an ' laughing ,
you that will not turn --
little bo - peep fell fast asleep ,
nor can dispense
may’st quickly meet the guerdon due ;
for it threw up the shell , but he the pearl ;
what a pleasant excursion to moscow !
then may your plants be press'd with fruit ,
when , pointing to his airy mound ,
the greeks with fierce assault should interpose .
of change and peace !
through all the army , and the favouring fates
the fat was so white , and the lean was so ruddy .
they called his mother lady
with ill - converted moisture , that the paunch
and we 'll keep you snug and safely in cremona . '
arrived from tegea with weighty news :
welcome to grasp of friendly hands ; to prayers
give the girls another drink ' fore we sign away--
" no tale i tell to - night , " he said ,
or satiate fury yield it from our foe .
which shares the common bale and bliss ,
wi ' chloris in my arms , be mine ;
should yet have no cause to account myself in a singular degree
invaded the white bosom of the lass
by all policemen on the beat ,
the toreador 's serenade
violent wind .
shout rapture ! rapture ! if sweet sorrow passes ,
now sound no note o trumpeters ,
knew what he should receive .   their commerce had its beginning in
nie equall to her lust , thought innocent :
then king olaf said : " o sea - king !
so cawnpore unto alma thundered back ,
fodder before them .   eager - helpful friends
upon his sacred rules , life 's precious sum
or , as the scriptures phrase it , my " _ inventions _ "
is it well with the heart that had you and none other ? _
which forms and sanctions all the rest ;
" ah !   wherefore , brandimart , did i let thee
catching fish of many species ,
and upon rodomont 's avenge the wrong ,
some gross - billed wader where the swamps are fat ?
and chalcis , beaten by the rolling deep .
but something ails it now ; the spot is curst .
but heather and mud were in place substituted ,
nor are ye blind to things below :
we 're all right here !
on dead volcanoes only lies the snow .
tiny tree - tops , rose or thyme ,
the tower of the sun shines bright
over hills , and through dales ,
thankful that here , as the calm eve of life ,
mindful were the ploughmen of who the steer had yoked ,
if you transgress again .
her face is so white -- is it a woman i see ,
should nature these fine toys produce ,
with every joy to take the mind ,
like as a rocket riseth glad
and bade drudge history in his footprints tread ,
his speech
bjarki var eigi betri en jafn
i follow thee"—he said , and stripp’d the slain .
i do not claim it ! let the earth
the water whispering from the birchen prow .
nor leave me here , but take me to the camp ,
and amusing himself with his pipe and cheroots ,
the thirst for meddling , restless still to show
it brings back that night in the dim arcade ,
yes , i was outworn .
and it was grief that made mankind your lover ,
stiffest the serpents round our genius laced,--
the nose and eye - ball the proud lycian fix’d ;
now say mine eies & cheeks are faire , what then ?
brave ghosts whose day 's not done ,
and by the palace porch she stood at last ,
build it upward , spray by spray ,
and gone with all the tribes that loved their shade ?
to correspond your hope and my desire :
a day new - ris'n , as he , who hath the power ,
home again , home again , jiggety - jog ;
all her duty , all her bliss ,
the nature with its maker thus conjoin'd ,
when she awakes she must not find him there .
save him who made it , meet .
“ but why the fortune of this contest leave ,
tho ' ne'er another trow me .
the little quivering disk of golden fire
nothing can draw the heart of man but good ;
for they 'd a very drastic way
see his pretty feathers shine !
" gladly pray we for thy rapid passage ,
more tired just lying there awake two hours
glooming under enchanted skies
" please give me a ride on your back ! "
respects his nonchalance , and laughs at him ;
meantime , the hills , and in the grassy vales
and soft - shed kisses and soft sleep shall snare ?
to free the rules for elenor murray so
y un año pasado había ,
i would start away before it awakened
set them for the best of uses .
be razed from our list , with that ugly old _ goat _ ,
sie hatten sich viel zu lieb .
struck out sick thoughts that could be overheard:-
and with her apron hides her eyes .
life 's a pudding full of plums ;
than the sound of a brazen bell .
let great folk hear and see .
cual hora combatimos , y llamaban
sound mournfully upon the winds and low ;
and sole apart retir'd , the soldan fierce .
my mary ! dear departed shade !
april airs were abroad ;
your fame , thus spread to distant lands ,
i thenke forto specifie .
than to go in age , for goddes sake ,
or likest hovering dreams ,
be christ our saviour still .
whilst i were a - strollin ' round and round ,
first peter , winding , thought his foe waxed faint ,
needs must i sing on these blue march days ?
thy father without fear , and challenged forth
who 'll make his shroud ?
here , battle , or elsewhere , and were i arm'd
fling blame at the blind man , prisoned in gloom ? "
becomes a garden with strange flowers and sprays .
and after lancelot , tristram , and geraint
sagar advised — with ready bow
the sitting - room , where words have been
lure of the brave old singing
trees with many birds and blossoms ;
and fix’d the date of all his woes to come .
to phrase you and praise you ,
and say it is esteem .
and make us sages with transfigured faces .
i 'd manacle her tiny wrists
but chiefly the woods were her fav'rite resort ,
by circular successive order springs :
an ' send the whole of it to me for my immediate use .
quamvis est monitus , venia caret : ut citharaedus
and sadly shock'd my first would be .
but my lord must go as i went ,
traced by the cannon - ball as it soared and fell
i am moved by fancies that are curled
as hys moder on slepe lay.aeuro(tm )
writes her scattered dream :
that vanished many a summer ago ,
placebo this was called , and justin that .
along the heath , and near his favourite tree ;
the olive of pece , and eke the dronkin vine ,
bravely have you toiled to help me ;
and dark and silent the water lies ;
through the wide forest pricked the weary groom .
in spars are drifted ,
all be as limp as irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer
there lay by chance a posted tree thereby ,
this threatens on one side , and that before ,
in the bells of the flowers -- an innocent tippling ?
come , eat the bread no man has sought
without an introduction would
the discord of unmeasured ill--
to the weak human eye unclosed ;
in a meek smile did go ,
to reign the master of the sun - burnt waste ,
and the broad newelled stair ,
she awaits
has left the church .   i have already sent
pricking her fingers with those cursed pins ,
' my friends are waiting at " the cain and abel , "
so let us welcome peaceful evening in
all weeping piteously , to different laws
and some draw sword for liberty ,
as the singer knew and touched it in the ends of all the earth ! _
“ her fast was broken ; thoughtless as she stray'd
each rosy ray from heaven withdrew ;
selling our love for a price , loaning our hearts for a bribe .
so strange may be its warrant .   o'er mine eyes
an ass in everything but ears !
was like gattie 's rose - water,--and , bright , here and there ,
there , graceful cressets from the gilded roof ,
fell the snow of her brow and throat .
a pledge , a token , of millennial rest ,
shall kiss that would not kiss thee " ( yea , kiss me )
" o souls so cruel ! that the farthest post
elder - blooms contrast the grace
they have done as worldings do ,
i have , my friend , but one word more ,
feet tread no more the mildewed prison stones ,
the original bengali
the influence of their dew . "   whileas i spake ,
weary of all they have to say ,
uprises the disastrous altar - star
was peopled and inhabited
arcady rise .
and thus from year to year , through hope and fear ,
his every sail to catch the lightest breeze .
here , the dark ocean roll'd across the land ,
panting , my leader said , like man foredone ,
which , with a long minority and care ,
the bride and the groom :
" fare thee well , mine island - dwelling ,
who preach'd the laughing moral ,
a woman waits with bag and shabby furs ,
yet still some profit from their pains may rise :
with little of study and less of art , and always in a hurry .
on europe thence , and where rome was to sway
of minor chords arrayed
' twas moonset at starting ; but while we drew near
seeming enclosed by what itself encloses ,
i thenke be , whil that i live .
but rebecca recollected
i welcome at my door .
of stuff from furthest lybia ; fair on her limbs it lay ;
for denmark 's salvation the man was born
these two eccentric " e 's " .   you were so small ,
for their ships and cargoes burned .
_ revenge _ had flung out cables to the quays ,
" the portrait that you sent up to the garret , last week , madam ? "
--nay , ellen , blench not thus away ,
orders i see depicted ; the haughty tribes of the poplars
above terrestrial things .
more useful sacrifice and greater work
what but that blessed brief
winding reel with threads for the cloths as fleecy ,
and rejoice as a slave at your feet low to lie ,
the old crow croaked his song :
hid in the glory of the noonday sun ,
from a peak without a top
a little dog sat with difficulty on his haunches , looking
no act of mine that men may scan
the inspiring bellows lie and pant below .
rest , mother - bird ! and when thy young
" starn all ! " echoed ben , with a movement aback ,
no sound on the earth , and no sound in the sky ,
back to the infernal pit i drag thee chained ,
went forth , and soon beside her love did stand ,
be clouded so that nothing but his nose
was outlined from the air , no more
and the hum of the country is weary , so weary !
aeschylus wanders back .
lingers still this light house legend .
" see you upon the horizon that small light -
lo ! from lemnos limping lamely ,
oh , no ! mary bawn ; thrice ye 'll ne'er deceive me .
evil and brief hath been my pilgrimage .
" the family 's gone abroad , " they said ,
thou , with the grey eyes kind and unafraid ,
let no man fear , for mighty prowess is
of the guests and the bridegroom there ; she fled
that thought away , turn , and with watchful eyes
not by the telescope now !
to let me lay the world before your feet ,
and i her keeper will attend her near :
hark ! through the silence of the cold , dull night ,
upon a misty , jutting head of land--
* replicaçion * , réplica .
blest in embraces of thy family .
made up the whole again of every part.--cowley .
hold of her one day when she was washing near their ship ,
found his hat , with heart - wrung anguish .
it is the hour !
upon his wife , the sanctity
vhile my black pants hang lonely und dark on de wall .
i _ know_--for death , who comes for me
ful sone and anon ;
on penalty of death , and suffering death ;
from afar thy cool and refreshing shade ,
me to perish for her love ?
but bluer sky brought newer tie ,
to what man in this world can do with life
but , for their wealth , he did devise
an ' , before we know , ' e 's ' ackin ' at our ' ead ;
one coughed hisse'f to death , an ' dat lef ' four .
for one king brought her a diamond hat ;
yet mid the assemblage m -- cd -- nald we trace ,
and swift i am gone where the hill - streams flow ,
what a picture they make against the skyline !
when all at once i saw a crowd ,
pauron de zoes abiou meros athresantes
offspring of asius , and where asius , son
acquir'd by traffic in the indian isles ,
of sharpening one 's nails with a file ! "
a garter that her knee has pressed !
for the flag of our country in triumph must wave
how sweet to hear my mother say ,
toward to - morrow 's goal .
be she bald , or does she wear
and i ceased in my believing ' twould be cloudy ever more .
here i have heard on hills the battle clash
why wert not thou born in my father 's dwelling ?
by the light of the sun and the rays of the moon ;
of ills , enough i ’ve had you ’ll own .
with them there rode sindold / and eke the keen hunold
but for a jest ' twixt bread and wine ,
of paradise , in the days that were !
sele , happiness , bliss , c. 5 . see _ seele _ .
and saw through irised clouds the pale sun shine .
what though my harp and viol be , ii . 199 .
and cool abodes of sylvan king .
blossomed in the eternal peace . here thou art to us the noonday
and be gone in a jiffy , before you awake .
' mid the glad family listening to thy voice
wenlock christison appears above , at the window of the prison ,
in thee must ever find a foe .
with cordial grasp of hands , and friendly words .
and he has fled .
" and hail thee , goddess of the spring . "
" why ? " said the eldest girl .
from smiling man . a slight , a single glance ,
even all that helped the stalwart danaans ' cause .
farewell ; but ere you go look forth and see
  the coal is seen glowing through the flame .
but just what moved it was not so plain .
but for the real manna , soon he grew
thy mark is feeble age , but thy false dart
he rose without a word and parted from her :
who is it here now drawing
but she made us go it .
from samuel butler 's posthumous works .
all what is bred in rich and precious vein
now still and cold thou here dost lie !
the life , shall mourn thy early doom ,
righteous lord of the feast , only save me from the horrid blast ,
i sate me down amid the yew tree 's shade ,
around its roots find their daily meals .
waking findst [ shall find ] me sleeping there .
one day he gazed far down the line ,
to see their flag to thirteen stripes surrender ,
his judgment slower , his decision less . "
her infant sees , and springs with hurried hand
" '' pon honor!--(_mimics_)--nothing can surpass the plan
with that adrastus ' bonds were done away ,
prudenter qui dicta loquive tacereve possit .
percipit adque horror.--
adventure , even though he come from a strange land . thou
and all in vain you strive against the stream ;
but now thy cominge is to me so swete ,
in life or death he must admire ,
of who avenged the old sea - rover 's smirch .
his title , and ' t is nothing but taxation ;
the lowest stair was marble white so smooth
we have got rich plains and highlands ,
rushed with his giant arms on bengal mike
ghost - like she follow'd through the death - like street .
standard of conduct , their personal worth , and their strength of
ireland , " vol . 3 , book 6 , chaps . 5 and 6 . lesley 's " answer to
falls softly , softly , over the hill ,
i am ,
where men may dwell together in accord ,
pure hopes of high intent :
and lets the great magnolias fling
in narrow confines , and sharpens there inside
and drifting clouds
v. 38 .   the last . ]   the city was divided into four compartments .
independently of its imperfections in other respects ,
as if some god had spoken . as for me ,
when in my arms burd helen dropped ,
at sunset , on a populous town ;
grant , sister , this , the latest grace i pray ,
bailey , lydia h. , i. lxxxviii
know this -- that from thy soul thou shalt be separated ,
o , study thou beneath the cross ,
alas ! ' t is only fancy thus adorns .
and thus in a fashion undignified
fishwives hurry to and fro ,
which ane , an ' which ane ,
" by my mother 's soul , do i entreat
now came i ( and with fear i bid my strain
incipe , parue puer , risu cognoscere matrem
and the tsze or oblique .
nay , sure , quoth she , he thus was born .
was gentleness . we walked on happy ways .
i fear ' twill be mysel ' ! "
yet ages ere men topped thee , late and soon
grievous sorrow to a young heart always to live in disquiet , and
sent the women to the drag - net ;
to the number of 9 , 11 , or 13 , in a strong box , and each is both
hesiod : ' can you tell me in briefest space what is best of all ? '
canto xliv . jambumáli ’s death .
the wind of winter blows .
at the bloody work they would look upon .
much of the time ogilvie is occupied with quite familiar and
stay ! take one image for thy dreamful night ;
where echo repeats the sweet wood - notes again .
fal . god save thy grace , king hal ! my royal hal !
have been hung up in honour of you .
i sang an old and moving story--
eyes with hot tears are wet ,
have here and there suggested a line on either side . after this
as the heart of the frightened fawn
the son of raghu to his breast :
and surprise my soul once more ;
from west to east .
as fair a thing as e'er was form'd of clay .
secretary to frederick ii , and that , having fallen into unmerited
the river unrecked , that did its broken flood
in crept the bear and through the hole
or both divide the crown :
his limbs he sorely tried ,
llorábanla sus doncellas ,
with worldly things , which did good thoughts repress ,
the soldier waves the shining sword , the shepherd boy his crook ,
to thrust it in again .
shot -- but the rock of the church lives on .
and the watcher at the window in the home they left behind .
that ignorance not less than knowledge charms .
while she their beauties in her mind cou'd trace .
you have forgotten your eastern origin ,
among the folk in eny regne
or who such virtue bright possesses . ”
forged for her six golden girdles ,
to hoary ocean 's depths the carcase threw ,
and when kindly falls the night ,
and , behold , for repayment ,
quo pharsalica turba congregatur ,
thou shouldst have gazed at distance and admired ,
unwearied still the fiend returns ,
the num'rous legions to his standard throng ,
o'er the irregulars in lust or gore ,
of ardent temper , quick and flashing zeal ,
a voice celestial echoed through the dome ,
till he can hardly breathe -- even so did hector son of priam take
who is this only happy she ,
along the sandy way where water fails
with nap of richest hues the fabric decks ,
last night from the great city , of a man
i come thy favor to seduce , and crave
he swung his sword in his two strong hands
nought seems quite worth the pain .
whereon his grief and pity grow afresh .
and will she now forbear to show
are not now men of high birth , the most noble , in misery roaming ?
( and how i love her no one knows ) ;
about the throne are four and twenty seats ;
in all my sovereign acts and deeds
my george , my eldest son !
i saw the surf upon the distant sands
by some immediate stroke ; but soon shall find
him , phyleus ' warrior son , approaching near ,
rings with the infamy of thracia 's king ,
cried she : " of tronje hagen / whoso for me will slay ,
in any square close - shuttered house
parties as rides , they pulls us up like winkin'--
of a by - gone age . on whirls the restless globe through
and boasted that he could not flatter .
and he 's always blest with an appetite !
what of the knight with the red sleeve ? '   ' he won . '
double - bodied , two - headed -- by separate ways
come ! for thy shield is bright and strong ,
the queen she got them upon her ,
seruaui , fateor , morte pudicitiam ,
there are foure kinds of tropes , substitution , comprehension ,
for such a journey need we apparel rich and gay . "
great was the throng , and round the palisade
( 32 )   the " jack ketch " of the day .
the favored son of that prophetic sire--
those million suns in the firmament of my dawn .
and all the things to which myself i give
she thought ' twas gunther 's manhood had laid her on the lea ;
life . lastly , it is true worth to look on our country 's weal as
_ faust _ . dear girl , what one calls sensible on earth ,
i stayed awhile , to see her throw
" yes i do -- except when i look at this stuff . ugh ! "
conducted them to rest ; she introduced
deaf to the rumour of fallacious fame ,
the western winds have landed on our coast ?
the first time that thou camest to the city .
" and -- gave the old concierge a penny .
soothed with the sound , the king grew vain ;
our childhood 's star again arise ,
when thou approachest with thy babes divine ,
the sea hath its pearls ,
lo ! where the stripling , wrapt in wonder , roves
we have more need the wind should do our will
some day i will claim as mine
for when a lover only hears of love
golden crown .
yet still it knows that there is only one
this way a goat leaps with wild blank of beard ;
floating on the billows landward ,
and as regards the younger folk , indeed ,
and would not spy me :
ever loves she what is new .
adore her prince 's birth , flat on her brest .
to devour the brood .
till the floor becomes her bier ,
had he lived in this land of tears ,
  the poems thus marked were written or translated for the present
as a happy people come
and wouldst thou hew it down ?
bends their strong necks , and tears them to the ground :
and then he loved her very well .
turn away in distress ....
this the answer of the virgins ,
you can only steer , an ' if rock be near , wit '
for orcus dark obeys his might ,
dispersed and scattered by the noonday sun !
our grandmothers used to adore ?
the virtues that awoke their voice endure !
never since first bellona us'd a shield ,
with all the echoes panting at pale feet
the blue is blue , but the gray is gray ,
frantic and blind , with thunder - knell ,
and turning as she fell we heard the clattering populzai .
breathes softly " hush " and " hush"--a sound that seems
the tepee 's gone , the peace pipe and the dance ,
to earthward thrust her high head under sun ,
in these fighting times , i say ,
" unwelcomed turn away ?
but now seen face to face , my only child !
in the swamps there are ground - nuts in plenty ;
upon these lines may light ,
as by the loveliest of all lakes
where the maples are red !
the silk star - broider'd coverlid
and mock the hideous howls of hell once more .
he levys at ese that frely levys
impatient nature had taught motion
oh , dear me , no!--upon miss io
no mud can soil us but the mud we throw .
even such as he , who hears the tumult wide ,
perchance might save some soul from hell ;
their standard royal toward heaven they spread ,
to the central public building ,
convey the tale to agamemnon 's ear ,
let the holy sparks enkindle ,
unites the basement with the floors above ;
was preface meet , ere yet abroad
watch the sunshine sift and drift
" --i have found nothing to see therein ,
" do thou remember me who am the pia ;
dwelt osseo with his father ;
edged with silver , and with gold ,
too late ! though he sped like a dart ,
on the opposite shore walked paul revere .
christ spared from fate 's malignant blow .
long sleeps the summer in the seed ;
often met in private and long ( in the due phrase ) " sat under "
then age comes on !   to habit we
wouldst thou , thine evil destiny fulfill'd ,
of the dead spray of heliotrope
insults on your fathers ' graves ;
here is the sluice with the race running under--
whereat mine ears i covered with my hands .
with wings outspread , each distinct both in brightness and in
but a big blot has hid each yesterday
the hair that falls on her shoulders ,
through the roof looked hiawatha ,
set free . well , i know
and turned on him with such a daunting look ,
the instant made eternity,--
nought but idleness awaits me ;
for , long ago , the truth to say ,
but in my story , right or wrong ,
to catch the scent ,
from girlhood 's instincts steal the blush of shame .
remembrance ! as we float along ,
had stripped his soul for the winter 's way ;
the _ lioness _ , willing to sanction the rest ,
you were all in white
with anticristes lollardie .
thirteenth century .
_ --bâton des aveugles ! béquille _
beauty peerless ,
my own voice , orotund sweeping and final .
can the bowl , or floweret 's dew ,
cool were the pleasant waters , gay
a lonely eden for their sake ?
iam reducem , ( caelo mage quam nunc ipse sccundo )
and thus the saintly orison began .
to sing again beneath thy shadowy trees ,
but natheles , men seyn that , at the laste ,
for sory of his frendes sorwe he is ,
thence he launches , in sheer despite ,
felt about leaving honor 's track ;
had buffeted awhile to sallowness .
their cov'ring seem'd ; and on his shoulder one
the forfeiture receiv'd , his just revenge ;
that all its wealth upon one object spent .
feller wants to jest go slow
flavor -- no fixture--
rose leaves red on white - jaw slants ,
and crimson light struck soft the phosphor wave .
but fraud , because of man peculiar evil ,
till we meet again--
as lowly spices gone to sleep ,
and his legs were fully covered .
outlightening sirius -- in its twilight throng
in outworn nature 's agony ;
she trod the poppies .   hours passed
and yet , such joy does in that craft abide
i had a star in heaven ;
through youthless life , think how it bleeds with anguish
be so , ashamed of thee .
and thus my mind explains its clear event :
here we perforce shall drag them ; and throughout
eager to net the soul before it wake ,
tne royal balm upon his head .
however , is said in his account of the year seventy - five , when
what holds it till his body turns to earth ?
give me the hand of a friend ,
forms of poetry during this period
and i remember home and the old time ,
i 'll find the lucky places out ,
so charming and rurally true--
near to your hearts , may never any greyness
and vengeance still unsated cries !
up , lady , while there yet is time ;
for virtue 's sake , the humblest of her friends .
globed suns that scent the land .
the royal plume upon his forehead rests ;
armed : for a journey i hardly knew
she call'd , she knock'd , no answer made ,
i beheld proud maximilian , kneeling humbly on the ground ;
the south an old offender ;
as when with white - tusked swine the herdmen drive
that you have n't heard folks tell
not enjoyment , and not sorrow ,
under the willow .
crashed , in the silence falling :
watching the mist - flocks driven through the hills ,
o'er the deep wi ' me , lassie ,
round her heart , a rosebud free ,
and brought , on stalwart shoulders laid ,
considered the matter in doubt ,
but when thou takest away the souls of men ,
its own unwearied symphony .
down to the river of blood where boiling lie
in my katamaran
thus the love - song was recorded ,
the oak hath scatter'd terror
" hark forward , forward , hollo ho ! "
his rushing pinion .
i heard a human voice that cried :
o , then , at last relent :   is there no place
and earnestly bespake them , and gave to understand ,
go call thy husband , woman , and come hither .
and he 'll eat you , eat you , eat you ,
active now the hands long folded
fields fresh with clover and with rye ;
with good red mud from twenty ditches
and he had golden hair
our rocks are medicine -- letters -- law ,
sure it befits me better ever to weep and wail .
ran thither , and the duty would discharge
break weapons all that smite this iron rod ,
my heart is sore ,
love 's tidings on the shore ,
he might have been , in fame 's retort , a hero ,
and walked about the docks .
the kyng said : aeuro ~ so mut i thee ,
of somethin' i once seen in some old book
which is the cause that many men do rate
was taken ,
small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave .
showering sorrow and light .
' if thou dost doubt thy child , depart secure ,
as if it said , " good day , good sir !
to - day he is a monster , where he was
and thine own choice
he reached the gate , which , touching with a rod ,
hoping for another glimpse of the cruel sea !
my children , never , never steal !
when , as their ladders touch'd the ruin'd wall ,
the great whips rang like shot , and steel
drinking the nut - brown ale ,
love is my sin , and thy dear virtue hate ,
as blushes the morn ' neath the sun 's first caresses !
none alive will pity me .
with liberty so near , your country 's call ?
as half - formed insects on the banks of nile ;
nor the smallest fragment loosen . "
before the childlike mind uncovered lay .
i bear her heart till the end of all ,
but i do n't like friends that do n't like mine . )
but i 'm glad that i 'm in town .
where have you been ?
not fit , perhaps you 'd say , that , to be quoted
not _ his _ the meed that crowned don hookham 's rhyme ,
but turnus ' fury at the word outbrake in sudden flame .
but the knight lives safe and well !
even so they spake , and he took and set down the bow in
brims not falls thy mother 's tear .
and that what 's bright attracts the eye .
with spirits dead why should men living fight ? "
and wondered at the mystery of it all .
cedar serene , benignant larch ,
  that object which had most seduced me from the love of
the blood of martyrs is her wine .
among the dancing shadows of the birds ,
than when i was a boy .
with lifted rood the slow monks swept along ,
spargitur imperiis ; molles tum major habenas
so she spake among her maidens , sitting in her chamber ,
to speake my minde here , as the duke hath done .
close beside a frozen river ,
how have our honored dead fought on in gloom !
ofttimes in hate and horrid ribaldry ?
skie - tinctur'd grain . like maia 's son he stood ,
with sun - burnt poesy whose throat breathes bare
then jesse 's youngest hope : " my brethren say ,
mens uidet astra , quies tumuli conplectitur artus ,
scarce , out of sight , had turnus reached the plain ,
said the handsome kaukomieli :
to see the shaft it dreamed of shot
her blood - flower , and its unsought neighbour pines .
i have a sun now of my own .
cometh the dark so soon .   i 've mocked thy word ;
then gather thou fire together and roast the heart for me ,
" mielikki , the forest 's mistress ,
dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths .
but there is a shadow
which all the gossips , busy as they were ,
but the thick umbrage , checking the wild growth
that glistened in the rising moon ,
to sing of things that comfort me ,
a song that lingers when all singing dies .
in the soft tablet of my easier breast ,
now find ourselves at once surprised and beat ,
the sweetly orient buds they dyed ,
thou hast the lips that should be kissed !
their city 's coronal , that the horse of death
our common world of joy and woe ,
apparently holding a consultation .
of lomapád the angas ’ king ,
as of corage thei ben liche ,
o life ! how pleasant , in thy morning ,
till at his friend the calender 's his horse at last stood still .
man 's merit ! and to crown it in voltaire ?
so worthy , tell me who thou was , " i said ,
where hearts were beating in their full content ;
could he only have waited he might have been great ,
and clearer far , thy brother hath set forth
and we , though we smite not , are not thralls ,
try to understand each other while we reckon up the div .
and kick at fate ,
they fetch from out the forest , glad and fain
patient and colourless , though heaven 's gold
we say , had you or i been there , as newton was that day ,
“ it flow'd ; so clear , that every stone was seen
accordin ' as commanded
silver , and goblets with goat 's figure in relief .... when nature
intent on her , that charm'd him , bernard gaz'd
o my brother , you redfaced , living man
for her son she weeps and trembles ,
then let us on , through shower and sun ,
she took me to her elfin grot ,
but some men , ignorant of matter , think ,
no tuft on cheek nor beard on chin ,
but hence , be sure , shall never this minstrel scathless go . "
the shepherd 's commendation of his nymph
for thirty years tubbs has been proud and poor , 405 .
i pass the foundling by , a race unknown ,
and in such space as on the notch a dart
why this fearful waste of life ?
enough -- when heaven ordains , i sink in night :
prostrate in acheron , nor can they find ,
with the base murmure of the waters fall ;
with water to the brim ;
the river maidens beckon me .
and therewithal he mingleth prayers : tarchon no while doth wait ,
left the mansions cold and cheerless ,
" beware , ye fair ! ye fair , beware !
of grace hath come , without baptismal rites
what mighty travails must have been ,
the laurels crackle in the sputt'ring fire ;
( ll . 478 - 495 ) the other tree was dark , sunless , and full of
doth yet appear the body of a ghost ,
then his master raised head too , and sniffed :
when man no more shall need thy saving grace ,
my heart was like a bird and took to flight ,
all meanly wrapped in swaddling bands ,
the changeful visible face
i mov'd and could not feel my limbs ,
the champain to its low extreme declines . "
uncertain as the lightning ’s wing .
and in the room where i was hid :
we will attend on sítá there ;
side - looking magians trafficked ; thence , by night ,
if tha wor mean .
then instant to alcinous and the rest
and more than simple duty moved thy feet .
beneath whose " _ branches _ of expense "
low down his beard and mix'd with hoary white
from the brown tents , and sparkling fires ,
and honor they keep in the olden way . "
you in the hammock ; and i , near by ,
cold as winter , white as spray--
fairest of all comely maidens
a dateless melody .
works suffice not , had yet made thee faithful . if this be so ,
he loves to hear the little brook a - gurgling ,
whose grandsire 's name adorns the title page ,
the service closed ; and o'er the church - yard spread
for men i 've three mischievous boys ,
sprang from my splendid sire ,
with their young giants leaping forth in glee ,
hee to his own a comforter will send ,
g got it .
under the vast dead sky ,
said " damn you " often , or as bad--
w was once a whale ,
to crown you with success .
ye with your godless blood yourselves shall pay the penalty ,
o raise thy heavenly voice , and bid me weep no more .
with us until to - morrow , by which time i shall be able to get
and as one shifts , another straight ensues :
" o it 's not a broken promise of yours
costanza still boasts of her valorous spouse .
in gaul 's melodious numbers ,
fish i ate , o me unhappy ,
on the threshold wept and lingered ,
across the stage comes the sweet - voiced lark .
that they have done expecting me ,
ill - fated suitors ; and this was the beginning of our end , for
bake fish , and cackle and squall .
friend and fellow of the waters .
home to thy royal town depart .
it 's off on a bowline to stornoway bay ,
a clanging ring or a creaking hook
the light of his smile when he stands before me like a dream
and drew all eyes its love to trace--
six heads at each .
of love , why we sitten hiere
a song , a song for the golden grain ,
lob will rouse up and shuffle
from hence , no cloud , or , to obstruct his sight ,
and that i , as the sheriff , should take up the job :
thus entertained he passed the night ,
round the evening tower ; and the young stars glance
or such as hers have had for ages
and learned what gave to him much greater joy--
thus flinty paths advanc'd , that ' cross the moles
take care you manage well your tongue
the crouching tiger haunts -- no gloomy cave
none knoweth save the throned who spoke ;
and seems itself the act to be
when robbie jigged in sprightly motion
not overloud nor overlong ,
and all olympus rings with loud alarms ;
i saw , at foot of his great labour , nimrod ,
turned round this while , and richardetto spied ;
flocked to his homilies ,
with the bullets kickin ' dust - spots on the green .
intolerable as the scanty breath
do i know that she is near ;
and thy great grandsire .   well befits , his long
the deathless gods respect the prayer of him
fierce bears and panthers prowled ; with these were seen
and horses were born with eagles ' wings ;
taky caky ,
' twill rise in beauty , strength and power ;
dream that the gods are good ;
so when the cruel march is done , an ' when the roads is blind ,
what vales of plenty those calm floods supply !
when youthful spring around us breathes ,
that deeper music of the sphere ,
for soon she 'll open wide the gate
e tiene otra tacha peor que le veo
een , eyes .
from them she seeks ; with tears , and bosoms torn ,
and in my saddest hours will gladden me .
he needed for the coming struggle .
the mourning image of dark to - day .
only for a short time while jove is still sleeping . i have sent
ringed in the foam of the silver sea ,
" to teach us faith in him till he return ;
food he said he was no longer fain , for thy mother asked
of a child on the stair ,
sugríva smote him neath the neck .
then also you , though but a youth ,
for aye sinsyne i ne'er can ha'e
untouched , untended , crumbling , weather - stained ,
and , as his father had requested , laid
bent low in the breath of an unknown sky .
with streams of light and sound :
or some fierce thing replete with too much rage ,
the idol of his heart , the world 's proud queen ?
the star o ' gloaming gilds the west ;
where sun - born flowers seldom bloom ,
to shelter tory bards like me
flashed harmless powder , while the curious deer
and did its little stunt
virgin from the beginning of the world .
and knighted this joss that decked it so ?
strike it ere they pitch it for the oncoming soul .
edged with o'erhanging rock , we took our rest
to bring them here , and to lead them there ,
to the dead man 's brother 's place .
you guard the threads of love and friendship
trip'd lightly by them o'er the green .
her forehead clear to her mate , virgin anew ,
cure is to be found save in authentic christianity ,
this tender goddess of all daintiness ,
as one whom most he favors , since he so fair a wife
into woods
our hearts unto each other , even in childhood !
‘ tell us tidingës , i you pray ,
if any be that loved him , seek not here ,
and wielding the single paddle with passionate sweep on sweep ,
and there no brave son is forgot ,
paleface men with concave glasses ,
shall win the young bride with her long flowing hair,[fo ]
do you remember a road that follows
but still the boatmen hear her call the cattle home
marriage i must have of you . '
no shame until the stranger knelt ;
flower - coloured , where its own sun 's fires illume
after all he was a young man , like his friend and contemporary
the beauty and love of life born else to die .
and waits to catch the fallen rose
are these , our brothers , lain to rest ,
win them away from play to devour with greedy attention
americans to market driven ,
canada , fair canada ,
their veil and petticoat -- alas ! to dwell
how gathers thy train to the sea from the heaven ! ) "
what care hath she for worlds without ,
when the forest - nymphs are beading
i 'll row you o'er the ferry . "
o ! passing breath !
the deep sonorous trumpet 's bellowing ,
that i had a world to do
is raised by a thought . and as a scroll
and forward went with joyful cheer and will ,
" long life to the bishops , hurrah ! hurrah !
and guides the eastern sages , who inquire
and those whom sleep eludes lie wide - eyed , hearing
sweet love will bloom again when i am sleeping ?
and voiceless like a slave his words obeyed ;
to put the tapers out ,
the goodly grain and the sun - flushed sleeper
the range of the marshes , the liberal marshes of glynn . "*24 *
impracticable than contranatural . assume in its full extent the
yet blame not beauty , which beguiles ,
their long last marble silence as they slept ,
that hath his eye already keen for bart'ring !
and why not gods of men ; since good , the more
prevail to save a periled ship . ' tis done ;
the bee 's long smothered hum , on the blue flag
who said that an out - o'-wark fettler
hath seen their like , nor any man hath worn ,
must die before its bloom ;
across the garden wall .
webster was rocked in a sap trough ;
a palace and a prison on each hand :
could you say so , and never say ,
some by the camp - fires , with their minds on the rack ,
and the river lay gleaming , sleeping , dreaming ,
avia pieridum peragro loca nullius ante
wildly wayward walt whitman ,
that she must travel . well she knew
may he set me where always      in after time
farewell , thou fair land ! which , till life 's pulse shall perish ,
she said : and more she could not say :
your thoughtful liberality i never can forget ;
" whoe'er thou art , before whose stream unknown
the cargo which the waggon bore
these spirits stood exculpate .   for the will ,
the flowers in the hedge give me answer and the morning air
to live accurst , whom men hold blest to be ;
i 've learned no client enters at your door
and if rude life should venture to press on ,
he soon reached a lovely spot , whose golden halls were bright
he might go down ; and this for utmost grace
thus have i seen a monarch at reviews ,
and the sight of his teeth would have made yours ache ,
spring 's joyful harbingers are we ,
now stockman bill , who took care of his nag ,
he gave the gift high guests obtain .
along the sombre city of our rage ,
the primrose banks how fair ;
his voice that shivered the mad trumpet 's blare,--
how dares its ulcerous face appear ,
from the third , and where is seen a horrible mode of justice .
is this the passage ?
come where the orchard spreads its store
connect the town and islet suburbs strewn .
and the next year 's violets grew on the spot where
in costliest urns their colors rest ;
with sails like blossoms shining after rain ,
alike in all things save the words they use ;
i tuke wi all mi meet ;
and proudly triumph , with a generous strife ,
it 's good the great green earth to roam ,
its meshes are so fine and strong ,
let not thy garish wing
but his answer cometh , as winds and as lutany .
saint gabriel once more to him comes down ,
vast the treasure i bring with these ,
me menoetius son of actor is still alive , as also peleus son of
for ' tis dotted as thick as a peacock 's with i 's . )
rings on her fingers , and bells on her toes ,
" i lie -- i cheat -- do any thing for pelf ,
the secrets of th ' abyss to spy ,
to court her , see what suitors come !
who art thou , that wouldst grave thy name
qu'ils tremblent dans l'azur ,
and they were healthy with their food ;
thee and their lips espous'd , while i admire
" the pipes of pan"--she showed it me , and read ,
somehow my soul seems suddenly free
i pray to god his necke might to - break .
glitters ; and , with his beauties all unveil'd ,
steady thy laden head across a brook ;
and how it is unmeshed ; wherefore it trembles here ; and for what
as bravely in the closet as the field ,
did turn them to the car , as to their rest :
  conversis studiis aetas animusq ; virilis
then to the half seven hundred too ,
long time too kept he from her the gifts that he had brought ,
engendered of a weak , unquiet heart ,
he doomed my doom of death and woe ,
held out for her annuity .
quarrelled about a questioned score .
and sullen moloch , fled ,
his daughter , had snatched from her a kiss in public .   the story
thy presence , lord , the place doth fill ,
except as it sweeps toward the star on which i stand alone ?
at the special desire ( he let out t'other day )
under the midriff ; through his liver pass'd
and half i took her for the ghost of one i used to know
in the warm earth 's bosom deep ,
as we were still at play ,
will not last our next session .   fitz funk is a peer ,
all out like a long life to a sour end--
wi ' jane the cook ,
shee opes the floodgate , and lets loose a tide
where beauty sits all day beside her knee
_ care not for that , and lay me where i fall ! _
and look on the kind , rough face .
never admit the one alone!--give not the gentle guide
on a morning
sprang from his seat , not doubting but a lecture
by vain prosperity receiv'd ,
on him alone intent : by land his steps
and gret richesse with hir nam ,
the sun sat shining without sound .
thus much of him : i leave the question here ,
when the light of my song is o'er ,
amid their barbarous twitter !
where most she does abide , and crave with tears
with a keen - headed arrow he shot the lion through .
what socours could ye find ?
gracious lord , we come with pleading
we 'll not be noisy or naughty at all ,
sing heigh ho ! the carrion crow ,
of people shrinks together and is soon
yet when i made my offering there ,
and the sad eyes of poor guatamozin ,
i have a cage that will keep you warm ,
what comfort johnny soon will bring ,
there is so little of the goose about 'em ,
he putte , it forto smelle and taste ,
their vainly - struggling lives -- ah , how can i
how pretty she look'd in her boddice of blue !
and once behind a rick of barley ,
like moisture from the crushing of the grape .
to thrive by dirty ways . but let me rest
in hose and gown and ring and chain ,
silencing the bird on tree ,
alive ? it is a hard thing for the living to see these places ,
as lull'd asleep ;
you could float to fairy - land ,
thousand golden coins the old man proffer’d ,
brother of men , when now i see
just the beauty of the dell ,
and but to faith , and not to sight ,
" we are going home , " i repeated . " to the willoughby . "
the faith i bore to my high charge was such ,
one alone met her approval .
into the kitchen with a quick look over the
within its figured curve the fading moon )
nor warm weather      nor winter showers
the savior of the world .
which but the semblance of a falsehood wears ,
thus goth he sterred in his kende ,
i believe in those wing'd purposes ,
in the shelter of the forest ;
in him was none ; for that high providence ,
with acclamations , shouts , and cryes ,
i think of deep glens , blocked with snow ;
my birth - place
walks ali weeping , from the chin his face
i ’ owt on this occasion —
the dark descent , and up to re - ascend ,
when thou , my love , art near .
and now she sings . ( o singer in the gloom ,
quorum ossa sol siccantque venti ,
we should surely bring up again where we now stand ,
louis , what reck i by thee
and as the air , when saturate with showers ,
more mischief by the blow is done :
penciled upon the throne , and as it waxed
of your town and parents . "
and musical , as silver bells ,
then from all care and foemen freed
shall call him from me , still i know ,
to mingle with the abysms of the sea .
that hung from dizzy pitch , and high
then back to the world once more .
as fat as any cat brought up on cream
" a falcon , tow'ring in her pride of place ,
daily i search the realms of hades
where’er the mighty day - god gleams
with hope and blessed him , and , restored to strength ,
but the storm retires , and the sky grows clear ,
less and less he grew in stature
that time 's hoar wings grow young therein ,
the night hath filled with rain .
higher degree of life , inducement strong
to subject a free country , blush for shame ,
as you sit on the terrace remembering
you do these little things for me so singularly cheap--
and but their heads above the pool are seen .
the valance on the high , white bed
best fight on well , for we taught him -- strike gallantly ,
he gave her lands ! she paid him with herself .
with brass , and tissued raiment , and with gold ;
must be caught from the pile , where their country expires .
perchance he sings the fates , perchance his song ,
she shook and trembled .   words in moaning plaint
and maske in mirth with graces well beseene ?
such is the world 's annoy .
which there i had discovered , flashed at first
for pohyola 's great carousal
the lily 's withered chalice falls
i can climb the jointed grass ;
and reasoning of whole nations , or of different classes of
i pleaded , outlaw - wise ,
land and drew her into a cave wherein the sea - nymphs hold their
if he were some servile slave !
there fix'd their arms , and there renew'd their name ,
_ dulce loquentem_,--but lalage must die .
of the soul behind a face
and the motherly chirrup of glad content ,
illustrious sanguine , like a grape of blood ;
these by menestheus , peteus ' son , were led .
washed across the flooded leas ;
in cymrian lands -- where still the torque of gold
while from my eyes the bitter tears are falling ,
for life by volumes lengthened ,
the force of vivian and of aldigier .
the holy innocent ! ”
aspiring little elf !
no woman , only womankind .
" i 've solem'ized grand weddin 's in me day ,
the dry wood burgeoned , and the sap of spring
the hand that holds the rope .
and gather strength from nature 's boundless store ,
zerbino stands , attentive how to ward ,
unusual in its cry :
he gave me , therefore , noble gifts ; from him
to purify this my augean stable :
den upon the mountains , full fed with deadly poisons , waits for
the wintry west extends his blast ,
live ever , with thy loving mind ,
for i heard the roses say
that she now had a chance of her fate getting bound ;
she smiled , she went up through the surf in the bay .
he will drive thee back dishonored ,
counting , too oft , its living members less
so ends childe harold his last pilgrimage !
which vanish ere we fix them ?
has the vineherd lost his cunning ?
as thought melts into endless thought , and round
upon the darkened nations ? from its beams
to grind thee some wheat
too soon arriv'd , sin there in power before ,
by most young lasses would have been derided .
and ' tis not wise to love too well , and this all women know .
here , or hereafter , you and i.
" it was not idle curiosity
yours was i born , and ye ,
but weeks and weeks passed silently before
therfor~ the lady whyt ase swane
' if he left then , ' i said , ' that ended it . '
with the gray dead .
all is not lost ; the unconquerable will ,
the millar 's daughter was baking bread ,
vanish from sight !
and lightened , laughing off repose .
showed talents for sinking as great as for rising ;
i hear the hindoo teaching his favorite pupil the loves , wars ,
i 'm good at work -- i work away ;
( and managed to escape the censor ) ,
' has married and stays
by the bulkhead , tall and dark ,
a new britannia in another world .
and the vines shrivelled in the breath of war .
with which all things whatever are replete ,
for love is crowned with the prime
must be used to free the sunshine ,
your life 's best days in studious labours past
the array of kith and kindred ,
long have we lived , joy'd , caress'd together ;
in a steaming barrack at mandalay .
though my coat looks best when it 's damp ;
and he kicked and pushed about him ,
then burst the burning tears as now--
and had got away through the town , e - ho !
strain for the far , pause , draw to strength again ....
cool palms that urge them see and praise
thy message to the king i bore .
thou art for them so arduous and so high ! "
but not by these .
it wound itself as far as the fifth gyre .
but , as you go , i 'll trouble you to hand
the hint was sufficient -- he put it to vote ,
besides , ' tis evident , that , seeing
and every morning when i wake ,
or , from that nothingness , by special grace ,
the cunning throne
ere the earliest peep of morn
which , but in her , can none behold ;
how fares the fight ?
feel ye no earthquake underneath ?
each shell a little perfect thing ,
_ bacchus _ againe , and _ ceres _ too .
o'er the dark hill 's brow ,
was much too pale and much too slight
hercules going fishing with his basket and his creel .
behold the bookshelf of a dunce
that night of love to thy mother ! ' "
when thy soft accents through mine ear
have you thought there could be but a single supreme ?
is situate on the coast , where po descends
listen how boldly it flows ,
so when his words wore o'er
his mouth was black with blood and sweat--
of torches that hurried from chamber to stair ;
big swell'd my bosom with a prophet 's glow :
laughs at the brood of follies as they fly ;
when the soul waketh , and life 's shadows flee ;
and the frightened breakers roar
with lips that fade , and human laughter
there was no better sport for the sir launcelots and sir
up to the castle stealing .
a stirring landscape and a generous earth !
the badge of each respective crew ,
of rascolde poetes yet is a shamfull rable ,
his foe in listed fight of life deprive ;
wrest her love 's strange secret from it ,
here 's that old friend who
they turn to stars or shadows ,
some sunny , summer yesterdays ,
the king himself initiates to the power :
to thy roofless towers he gave ;
next afternoon they met , the sheriff told
long since he lost his shining wings .
by deep resentment stung , who seem'd to say :
he shivers through the night .
loud sang the souls of the jolly , jolly mariners :
cheering us on our way .
present habitudes of thought .   real mirth must always be natural ,
at london thames is a broad stream ,
through more dense shades can reach the good unknown
of spiritual or other discipline ,
he whispered to the trees strange tales
with ' tu mi chamas 's ' from portingale ,
and still they strove and wrangled : and she grieved
must i distrust the gently - warning impulse , the precept
i lost it in the sand ,
" she is won ! we are gone , over bank , bush , and scaur ;
on tranquil land , beneath a sky of bliss .
a vessel 's plank is smooth and even laid ,
the magic circle there
--"not a farthing ! " cried the people.--
the flicker tapping on some hollow bole ;
my thought with waking pangs ; i saw
bleak and lean , grey and cruel ,
but the husband said quite coolly :
calvin 's sons ! calvin 's sons , seize your spiritual guns ,
amerc'd _ him _ only of his wish'd return .
had come such question of grave import
the sharpshooters rattled a sharp tattoo ,
in the butt 's heart her trembling messenger !
and snatched and snapped it in swift child 's whim ,
i would convince the world by taudry cloa 's ,
of many mourners roll'd .
glad once more to greet each other .
* have slept with the bee--
season withdraws himself and his troops from the war . during this
and though our hearts , unhoused , unfed , must still go wandering ,
what time removes was but a loan ,
close , but invisible ,
brothers , sisters , husbands , wives--
now all men beside are not in it , peter,--
dawn , in the deepest glen , fell a wonder of light ;
shot sideways , like a swallow 's wings .
her from her husband 's widow'd arms he tore :
adown the dusty concord road ,
young heirs designed to he knighted , or young gentlemen of
a human child , not a god at all ;
the work is nearly done .   but this last judgment
pourest thy full heart
ingenium fati sumus , ambitioque malorum .
in such beauty , dimly fainted
well was his onset warded by the graybeard stout and true .
for he would learne their busines secretly ,
much less that durst upon his own head draw
zarncke , _ das nibelungenlied _ , 6th ed . , leipzig , 1887 .
to taste sweet joys beyond the grave ,
for some remoter sphere !
i love the weeds along the fen ,
and i could feel it move .
what ( whether dittany or pancy hight )
enclin to alle drunkenesse,-
and your branches sing ,
his hand , but broke his scythe , there is a power
my tributary loue , and not my land ,
compassed with clouds of various glow ,
and children .
“ their bodies in the hollow fen ; now raise
a home among the gods has won .
to seek amidst our solemn depths of wood
and the nights and days .
whose weeds but prove the richness of the ground--
straining beneath the weight of giant limbs ,
such easy sweets get off still in their prime ,
unto the beautiful garden , blossoming
thus thei that comen ferst tofore
and from the sun his body screened ,
conculcare soles , vt humum , et ludibria sensus :
and if it mihte so betyde ,
of both ? ' tis here :   and what can suns give more ?
the image of thir glorious maker shon ,
there is a place in hell called malebolge , all of stone of the
from every petty debt i owe ,
and he a wave .   joy , tingling , crept
may shake them out of their complacency
battels and realms : in these he put two weights
but thought of bharat’s(523 ) pain and toil ,
to live in heaven , where happines is rife :
" i am a bending aged tree ,
shimmering stuffs from many an eastern loom ,
dwelling of warriors stark and frore !
‘ oh , sweet with thee each hour — each wilding way ,
y de algunos cirios
soft wafted dark curls from pale temples--
never yet did i encounter than our friend upon the floor !
and leave it still as death .
thou canst not .   hast thou turnd the least of these
or[v]he mentally sighteth a tiger of india , that low
there 's something tells me , all 's not o'er
i on the queen of floods will gaze ,
are free of my lingering kiss .
and charity that whets a poniard 's edge ;
( the lord 's first gift , the lord 's especial charge )
wafted the traveller to the beauteous west .
a truth that floats serene and clear ,
a button , a loop , or that luminous patch ,
shrieking she to the lattice flew ,
then owre the window ' gan to grape
shafts of sunshine from the west
in garner , for the bitter bread
with all their silken , all their airy kin ,
but serve to make thy name , where'er we go ,
i can not , vext and harass'd as i am ,
that interrupts the morn
and there the dardans battle - slain , for whom the wailing went
when we headed off the aurochs turn for turn ;
-- as by debussy 's
but , when i get on to the continent ,
capt . g. ( faintly to m. ) this is hades ! can i wipe my face now ?
but apollo 's hand waved warning :
all thy friends are lapp'd in lead . "
lonely is he , and his heart is assailed
halls a barren heifer , the best i had , and fill the pyre
her hand sustain'd a bow : and thus array'd
of ordered thoughts -- and all again is silence .
or give me back my own again !
and , enamored , do wish , so they might
till god 's own smile came out :
you make a good impromptu wife .
hor . it is a nipping and eager air . "--hamlet .
much she sobbed , and much was sighing ,
and easy , smiling , seasoned sound ,
then o'er his shoulder threw his sword ; bright flash'd
of those dispatched by king troyano 's son
for life is all too short , dear ,
are ye not smitten by a youngling arm ?
he gave the girl in golden days before --
then , all dispersing , various tasks attend ;
i claim a free man 's right
but in the cause of liberty ,
upon my right hand i beheld new anguish ,
o ' the way i should begin it ;
for the men with swords are girded ,
" cold was the night wind , drifting fast the snow fell ,
band ?
rapt to the beautiful thy soul must be ,
as that is , and so simply natural ,
who s beaute was withoute wane ,
“ or that you doom'd him so accus'd to die ?
an ale - house , wincot - way . i lodged with her
louder than the blare of bands , victorious ,
the harmony of things -- this hard decree ,
and yet to reach it one must still
" all - seeing monarch ! whether lycia ’s coast ,
which on the wind came roaring after
shall i steal forth to seek for solitude
songs from an evil wood
the mortal - temper'd steel deceiv'd his hand :
but to prove its sweets it yields its will
tis this that wards the blow , or stills the smart ,
the bustle of small lives , then wearily
and used the brake with skill ,
to the questions your eyes ask of me :
him answer'd then the goddess azure - eyed .
once more i hush my babe to rest ,
in droning flight above the countryside ,
till fra boyhood to manhood mi frame did expand .
pierce through the fogs and know thy mystery .
his soul is now to heaven fled ,
to setten him fro loves grace
shall see thee blotted from thy place .
with whatever it is they sing ;
i wonder , if you saw a bird ,
all the old romantic legends ,
and forgotten that the bauld bacleuch
the knaves _ elixir _ , and the just man 's _ bane _ ,
as if kuutar 's self had wove it ,
whereby all things upheld and heavenward drawn .
some flowers they only shed their bloom
the quarrels of the mighty without fear
betook me to the ships with my godlike company , and my
  " an old commentator of the chou - king says , the ancients having
a christmas gambol oft would cheer
and be the bud at burst ;
were major - general john 's .
mourn'd through its bleeding wounds : " o giacomo
in breasts of angels high and good !
gentle as the dove 's :
and leaped the rubicon , was such a flight
and fixity of purpose needed for
with sheridan fifteen miles away .
what every flower , as country people hold ,
so spirituall , pure , and fair
two friends kept step beside me ,
his horse , who never in that sort
no smile demeter cast :   the gloom she saw ,
" o yes : they 're very nice , indeed .
earthquake wing his flight into the air and leave them . of the
the second whip was kitty myngs ,
it is the shadow cast by too much light .
flere tuas est flere meas , tua lacryma , christe ,
the terror of the tempest of their wings .
and gin 'em both her blessin ' .
a presage ominous , portending still
bold southron , never fear !
i watched them toddle through the door--
let him push at the door,--in the chimney roar ,
de mi niñez las lágrimas secaba ...
who enters at that door .
ah ! little doth the young - one dream ,
the hum of armies gathering rank on rank !
“ the glorious title of the grecian youth
de wave run high an ' fas ' ,
give me the iron key ,
" there 's no saying . she 's filling as fast as she can . look ! "
will rush to prove the daring of the island breed .
than yours , at freedom 's trumpet - call ,
like to the top - sails of some far - off fleet
and ovyrturnyd as the blynde
let helen smile too oft on maurine 's beaux ,
yet , goddess , yet the way explore
the unfraternal brothers dwell .
and as sche caste hire yhe aboute ,
“ tri marchlwyth ynys prydain — ar ail marchlwyth aduc cornann march
and fast as evening sunbeams from the sea
spirit of our race ,
that he once was a printer of good reputation ,
al . “ athrwys , ” ( ath - rhwys ) “ very vigorously . ”
lights the land from sea to sea ,
the bird will bring
pity and sorrow , as the portress spoke ,
there should have been ; for nature gave you both
he dooms it to descend .   before him stand
‘ blow , blow , ’ i cry , ‘ you burst your cheeks in vain !
remained in the good white ship to go .
a blending of sweet hope and resignation :
the rushing stream , and make him drive the wheel
guilt stripped off the foliage in its pride
and drinking up the poison strong ,
and waving wide his wings of white ,
and learn old truths of modern lies instead ;
when , midst the carol that the birds did sing
of all the house here is the heart ,
that ownest the soul ,
churning an ' choking and chuckling , quiet and scummy and dark--
they , the scoffers , the scornful of chains ,
as doctors give physic by way of prevention ,
nor you alone ye facts of modern science ,
but to conclude my silly rhyme
i turned , and sung my vespers there .
across my face his mane was blown ,
the great black crows are flyin ' ,
so stood aghast the sinner when he rose .
and tells that o'er these holy groves
it carries thee in safety o'er ;
strong as you are , ’ tis mortal force you trust ,
and bring to me my richest mail ,
and thy body but dust for the wind 's pasture
i love thee and i trust thee .   thou art to me
and the night will hallow the day ;
late shown her by anglantes ' cavalier .
davison 's poetical rhapsody
dark fainted in light
the field of glory !   well , i do n't think !
but guarding clean traditions ,
beam'd keen with honour .
my soul in childhood with a hope so strong ?
changed hope and fear till fear took flight ,
there were pike and brown and chandler ,
and we know that at least of one bard it could boast,--
inscription ; but a monument has been erected to his memory in
mit a long white beard a fallin '
a last , a last farewell !
so that another life the first may leave !
till but a shade is left of him .
but careless of their becks and wiles ,
how beautiful is night !
and flies , and dust , and sun . "
i am death - strong in my soul .
wits , his adherents and followers , were certain to concur .   pope
that here is one who drinks to you ,
and to restrain them from their bleating dams :
how to free the charmed wi - no - na :
but that is fancy -- for the starlight dews
into this blind world , from that pleasant land
and bids her beau demand the precious hairs :
a few short struggles and the scene was o'er ,
ethereal vertues ; or these titles now
the pisces play with undulating glance
as vague and shadowy as the shapes
when winter winds are piercing chill ,
wonder , stand still , gaze , and trip satisfied ;
while thus i grieved , and kiss'd her glove ,
part sleep , but others jealous watch his charge .
thee , when young spring first questioned winter 's sway ,
i do affect ;
" vain thought conceiv'st thou .   that ignoble life ,
an ' clouds were in the skies ,
by death 's cold hand unbroken ,
“ her lover . venus bless'd the match she made ;
the last imposing , binding words were said -
the metal of the gun ,
either 's averted , watchful glance !
with fire and water , more and more .
to an overflowing of happy tears ,
and each began on the other angrily to glare .
the weight of waters saps the yielding wall ,
as when large floods of radiance from above
there is no chance , no destiny , no fate ,
and where dim lanterns , swinging there ,
requir'st my lay -- thy sultry decks i know ,
mine eye was dancing on them with delight ,
and he wha cleans the fairy ring
that had thee here obscure .
constellations , and the whole of taurus , between them .
molest no more this rising land .
upstarting , from the place they sped .
i grant the prayer for thy dear sake .
echo'd deep tones , hollow as blasts escaped
ther cam walkende upon the stronde
i listen in vain for love 's pleading once more ,
" never saw i fiddler / so dauntless heart display ,
that seemed nought else might in their thoughts have room .
where the song of the poet soars ,
lie pale and breathless round the fields of troy !
then alice , and mabel , and ely went up close to the fender , and
the lark springs to the sun once more ,
life has lost savour since you and i parted ;
has grown too sad for sighs and seeks
sees all her sons at play ;
and with it much of loveliness .
disdain her ire new sharped and kindled hath ,
from the master of life , who made you !
and i had laid the mallet by ,
damsel , induce you to contemplate suicide !
their bugle blasts begin ,
so watchful sav'd;--nor to the stream - fond swans ,
brother , i pardon thee .
perchance , unwittingly , i 've heard
to scold a little at the false alarm
my brothers live in austria 's pay
each onward held his headlong course ,
and beautiful in both is she .
who saw them live , who felt them die ,
the image was burnt utterly ,
but this time consciously , of grace
and in our secrets keep your own ,
by thee doth so neglected lie ,
all thy smiles and all thy tears
nor mute , that the world might belie .
rope wo n't hang butcher ;
an ’ nature ’s voice fra every bush
that smote on níla ’s side and chest :
or is it that both stand amazed before
and harmless sees the feathered shafts rebound ;
of the men you meet , of progress made ,
sat by themselves , nor raised their serious eyes , nor spoke :
a sanction for so great a joy .
aiming to show i wish for no alternative . "
margaret ! pearl ! i have sought and found you ;
my parent and i produce one another ,
more than thou lovest them , or lovest me .
with the word no heart can say .
soon recollecting , with high words , that bore
she could not look on the sweet heaven ,
not in the phrensy of a dreamer 's eye ,
form shall communicate itself to the very disguise , and indicate
' mong them that she did find there : / she fairer each did greet .
your fights , your battles , and your combats bold .
and gifts can conquer every soul but thine.(213 )
or watch the wind , or listen to the beat
ere reckoned fit to face the foe--
to memory 's voice , again i seem to hear
" you only say so . not another house
the masters of the subtle schools
beautiful bidding of death !
wash , and partake serene the friendly feast .
what the tidings that thou bringest ? "
then , yielding to the forceful arguments ,
in good time by her own ,
such childish humour from weak minds proceeds :
he laid us as we lay at birth
i wandered through scoglietto 's far retreat ,
these now are ours . this instant who thou wert
and speaking not a word , they go ,
an ' bung up ' is both eyes , too ! "
for thou my lyre , and thou my heart ,
but they tell the lies i am wonted to ,
an ' if he can , i 've little doubt ,
below me in the valley , deep and green
that you are heir to all the ages ?
come then ! and while the slow icicle hangs
for in a letter she had told him all
thou seest ambition lift the impious head ,
a grege mutorum , atque ideo venerabile soli
" i 've laid in food , dear ,
and burritt , stammering through his hundred tongues ,
of ancient mysteries and hopeless creeds
you shout the bumpkin who 's raking his hay ,
his well - steeled spear within his hand he took ,
( _ the mermaid dances the floor upon _ )
on the land or on the sea ,
thurgh which the deyntes of my thoght
within the bower the giant passed :
thy lip may never that trust recal .
and from the heavens the gloom ,
and did you speak to him again ?
that the poor slave he should be freed ,
that lists the tuck of drum . '
under their waves at intervals flames a pale levin through ,
the vinegar and gall once more applied !
is this that firm decree which all doth bind ?
" it sniffed and ran from the ptarmigan i had poisoned to excess ;
always eyes east
a little lamp hath put ,
to chase the doe of heart 's desire
and who , though often suffering , will not stoop to learn .
and they obey my sceptre and my spell .
and hope and weariness kiss each other .
wot you 're doin' the best wot you can ,
nor breathed he free till far behind
you did entice this champion from his duty .
the thinkers stood aside
_ stretching himself out on the settle and playing with the brush ,
which tells you whom to shun and whom to greet:[9.b . ]
' tis too apparent , argue what you can ,
and seen bright lines of lightning gleam .
and scream among thy fellows ; reeds shall bend ,
and for their chieftain they shall gladly take thee .
through heaven the stars begin to peep ,
with oils and honey blazed the augmented fires ,
celestial arms he used in fight ,
two who would have me know of their marriage ? and , strangest
nor shall you lose it at the last .
while a ' our gude neighbours are stirring sae early .
the weak unsatisfied strain
touched by the brush of franco bolognese ;
with frequent emeralds studded .   gems of price
from the wheels of the august
while peggy would sit beside me ,
hey diddle diddle , the cat and the fiddle ,
public opinion .   fear , too , the wrath of heaven , lest the gods
neighbour , ' ah , but when awake do we ever believe ourselves
till at last they reached raud 's dwelling
while i expos'd to all the rage of heat
chiefly , because the men that could write it best are those that
then tho ' i drudge thro ' dub an ' mire
illam & parentum dira gementium
and they sang " tilly - loo ! "
with his men a thousand / upon the following day
though forced to drudge for the dregs of men ,
but a voice cruel and flat
only this is sure -- the sight were other ,
works be machinery , but i dunno .
“ if truth it be that thou tellest me ,
all things are full , can not in its own nature be so potent that
and the thyme it is wither'd , and rue is in prime .
so he ; whose words soon as the sacred might
the scotch blue bell , vol . v. , 233 .
" dazzle mine eyes , or do i see three suns ? "
i seemed to see roy glide before my gaze .
' tis , after all , a gift horse , " said she ;
he was , methinks , like that frail flower that comes
oh ! wealth and power and rank and pride
using six hard blocks of sandstone ,
i fain had kept him in the ancient home ! "
the foot thro ' graves forgotten goes ,
between them , it had been less easily excused .
knowledge of objects,--wonders yet to thee !
tom was so bold he did require
" from the master of life descending ,
thought it mine own almost , so thither took
the number'd sands that slide
for that and more , by sweetness all our own"--gifford .
whose changeful waves forever chant their grand triumphal hymn .
all trace was vanish'd .   two yet neither seem'd
the eyes of many a champion with scalding tears were red .
the man is apathetic , you deduce ?
the fog - hidden caves of the west--
for i thinke , thou art one penny worser than hee .
to meek submission : thou at season fit
" drink wine , and thy flesh shall be made whole .   look how
i gave him some garters ,
oh that its voice might pierces the ear
with heart a little fearful of the dawn
ah , hair ! are you not grieved
when first we met as youth and maid ,
but caesar!--ah , that is a crime ,
let your work be , bride .   listen , the guest has come .
only different modes of evil in the busy interests of the world .
thou bad'st me lead thee . thou shalt find our chiefs
he may take pity , neither overshadow our city with a great
thus chang'd , amidst the crying crowd she ran ,
we pour in a sinister mass , we ascend a stair ,
of things forepast , nor moniments of time ;
they vapour'd awhile , and were in good hope ,
practise an art , never to those who drive a trade ; discretion ,
then , as her strength with years increas'd , began
denique laudari sacrato caesaris ore
took him to the self - same place .
and sometimes thro ' the mirror blue
no more of your martial music ;
dispersing darkness,--unto him hath been
the queen 's mouth was most fair ;
softly suffused thro ' the world 's dark shrouds ,
because you do n't ' elp 'em remain ,
still let him sing to us ever , and bring to us
by a giant gully 's brink
whilst dey boasts 'bout deir gals
and beneath , from the pebbles , in passing , a spark
no man dared to strive with kwasind ,
grace into every motion , like the play
i never saw before
more near to god , to man more near .
i took him by the left leg ,
and individuality -- those eight
city of the trojans . at your bidding i suffused my sweet self
a vision on us ! what a head ,
i was the tallest there ;
of warfare , hence permitted he is come ,
stoops by his grave and will not pass ;
the cold eyes of your heart to light the fire .
and many are the hot , convulsive tears ,
young vine - leaves pushing timid fingers forth ,
you saw my passion for you from the start .
thus to convene the whole ethereal state ?
but mirth is turned to melancholy ,
mundum decoro vulnere fulciet ;
of warrior saved by a ring ,
meet with soft kiss , and mingle in the skies ,
you 's never tasted ' tall .
and the prince looked so grand and proud ,
brand the craven on his brow !
nor made of glass , or wood , or stone ,
she spurred the slow , and reined the forward short .
i can not say that i like the face
i shall tell thee clearly , or him that will release me .
whence i to her replied : " something divine
in battle - prowess do i equal thee
so he twitched his fair ears up and down
the eclipses timed in babylon help us now
she has violet eyes and ruby lips ,
forth passed the third with head down bent ,
and , scathed by fire , the greensward 's darkened vest
three kites against the sunset
peasants _ pass _ .
at halifax ; ' but now he served the tartars .
than fictions were of thessaly !
of marble , till the brows and lips and breast
with plenteous store of heath and wither'd fern ,
come , o come to my lake , if you would plunge to your death .
but upward they returned in briefer time ,
since when another life we live ,
though few are willing , and their years they fill
forgets to journey westward , till the moon
and on the earth his body yet may show
said , " no ! he would n't do at all ,
ailing but apt for every sort of noise ,
to bear her through the desert woods unseen
yet under benedict 's roof hospitality seemed more abundant :
against the tempest , and against their blows .
give light of love ; for gold is cold ,
walked simply clad , a queen of high romances ,
went the whippoorwill complaining ,
and anxious hours of fear and care
he straight replied : " no wonder , since he knows ,
to train the supple mind and will ,
these leafy isles upon the ocean thrown ,
her face it bloomed like a sweet flower
when a child upon the matting
how siegfried was slain
their ribbons just beyond the eye ,
and cruel ' enviest thou a short repose ?
the lash resounds , the coursers rush to war .
by the funny , rumbling rig ;
the thunder shall howl , while with mad jubilee
impersonal death ;
i 'd climb to the eyries of eagle men
prophet of mischief ! from whose tongue no note
at length a whispering voice .
moment you see that he is asleep seize him ; put forth all your
upon a lofty bough ,
which dun and sullen heaved , with surge
to despair are most inclined .
attendance none shall need , nor train , where none
and new clarissas only sigh--'how wild ! ' "
of cheerful hopes that filled the world with light--
should here abide ,
as from the depths of unsuspected hells ,
canto cix . the praises of truth .
doomed ever in suspense to dwell ,
mine eye advanc'd not : but i heard a horn
there they stand , to ask thee thy career :
he had a son , james edgar john ,
gazed on their mightier parents , where the pine
tale after shameless tale .
give a cheer !
' had i wist ' -
gowd 's no that scanty in ilk siller pock ,
and the promise that betrays .
" my kittens , with tails so cunningly curled ,
is a neighbor 's homely daughter ,
the blush of innocence was up in arms ,
the figure crouched astern .
in washington they left a dismal void,--
by absence this good means i gain ,
and trains the bordering vines , whose blue
said--"wilton ! grieve not for thy woes ,
smart lad , to slip betimes away
my story of hopeless loving--
that the next man who came should prove the scheme ;
to plesen hire in al my myht :
her stricken home . there , in her chamber , all her stores
_ hark ! the numbers soft and clear _
( the tenant merely counts as weight ,
the vision changed,--i saw her parting tears ,
an ' joshed the farmer and his hired hand !
from sidon 's city , forcing them to spread their sails abroad ?
then chance and fortune are sae guided ,
of fans shows thermometers high)--
with the gallant good riou :
manto , who sought through many lands , then settled there where
underneath all , nativity ,
cease with vain boasts my scorn to move ,
their feathered nets , thick sleet - storms will i shower
they put no restraint either on body or mind .
and each a splendour and delight
literature ; and , above all , of a lovable and gentle disposition ;
as in this case , most worthy of all praise .
when good lack , and who ’d a thought it ,
alone upon the housetops to the north ,
of the precious casket ,
at other times , reverse of this is true ,
when the tamals lived upon it .
in peace beneath their trees ! dost thou not know ,
grown savourless , and yet he longs to sin
but such a lovely good - intent
the field he holds forever .
resigned at last to listen and obey ,
the barren landscape 's face to cheer ,
without , they gilded are so that it dazzles ;
guard thee from the powers of evil ;
not by thy climate , but capricious crime ,
there 's other good that does not make man happy ;
every sorrow 's lulled to sleep .
the peer i do n't envy , i give him his bow ;
thou our beloved and light of earth hast crossed
and so last night she fell to canvass you :
vapour of the fire will not reach them . '
" yet having opportunity , he tries ,
y hundirte en mi pasión ;
a daily resurrection ? your hope -- and mine !
really sound , white men ,
" hard it is to track the fire ,
fred stopp'd the doctor , yesterday ,
that she calls life , and looking far above
the palace that to heav'n his pillars threw ,
thus all the tribe of spirits , as they turn'd
and there , leaned o'er the wave and o'er the immeasurableness ,
came the warriors of the nations ,
they wrung his hand in sympathy ,
hay ricas alcatifas y alquiceles
from a to and , from aus to bis
of tender roots where they are thrust and curled ,
with gloomy aspect rose the ling'ring dawn ,
how i shall draw her picture -- the young heart
mock me , an impotent cortez here below ,
you bet he made rome howl , sir ,
but while the surf they tumbled through ,
bullets flew ,
and down the iron stair we tramped ,
and after dreaming the imprinted passion
if you hafen't i d vas gueer ,
one large gold bracelet clasp'd each lovely arm ,
an elfin avalanche ;
my icy blood did curdling creep ,
manhood with his fiery glance ,
and find love 's sunshine soon o'ercast ,
and this same flower that smiles to - day ,
like leaf or partridge in october ;
and the whole battle was display'd . then spake
a fair god dwelling with you -- love , the lord !
within those aching eyes i saw .
for here i leave my second leg ,
she did , for she brought me up along with her daughter ctimene ,
" therefore do they whet their broadswords ,
in the spring o ' the year .
smiles , with his eyes of love , the setting sun ;
" but such as at this day , to indians known ,
and staggering up to the brink of the gulf man will look down
the electric ethers may be separately accumulated by contact of
before the sleigh had gone ;
stillness with love , and day with light .
that may it more to mortall eyes commend ,
and thoghte ek hou that he ansuerde ,
their precious burden and are fled .
come , let us sleep , perchance
and that was all i heard .
o richest fortune sourly crost ,
play when we halt , and , when the evening comes
and when the breeze swept by , i wist
there , stretch'd forlorn , nourishing grief , he weeps
not from the burnets , oldmixons , and cookes .
facile with phrases of length and latinity ,
( milton : _ ode on the morning of christ 's nativity _ . 1629 . )
on thy lips the smile of truth .
for beneficial air and change of view ;
and revere thine elder brother ,
in combat killed by those of spain , and lay
his country 's buckler , and the grecian boast ;
o'er all the world , far from their glorious home .
that pore men and monyles may hir onys se
of heav'n parwin and mushtari they flung ,
and yet upon the morrow early rise ,
and he rattled on his journey ,
thro ' the darkness and the drift !
" oh , willow , titwillow , titwillow ! "
the roses nod to the sound of the waves ,
an anthem fully glorified--
in pitched field , or private combat fight .
strange care o ' th ' gods the murth'resse doth avail !
your native soil was right ill - willie ;
but worse than whispers was to be .
with four hundred outlaw men .
when boys will start on the track from home
this dragging night , with starts in fear
answered in the words which follow :
shut , when titan goes to bed ;
cho.--king charles , and who 'll do him right now ?
that every time she looked my way
in striking language , at this early hour .
sans bitterness , desiring less
fallen man .
" priest , " quoth gawaine , " remember , but a sound ,
the king consented , but the fates refused .
was very foul , and while it was at wash
with its dream of dreams :
the holy seven who harboured here ,
" false pontus ! and the calm i hailed ,
and woman made for man .
she sees one recline
( for all this past in the realms of the blest . )
with his sword and flaming furnace ,
of a shorn and shotted plain ,
where sunset blushed ,
" rinaldo is well known , " and there a long
say this , and her sweet pity will approve ,
for land of smoke and suicide--
like angry jonah 's gourd at nineveh ,
or why did high heauen frame thee such a creature ,
please to remember the fifth of november ,
could we but know
you look at me with pale eyes ,
sad - eyed and weary , thou must suffer more ,
and when they met iscariot ,
whose spirit with her latest sigh
or in the plains of tempe lay me down ,
beatrice suffer'd : she , with such a smile ,
korindabria , korindabria , bogarona , bogarona . iwariniang
the roarin ' game , the roarin ' game ,
i work at night time ,
on hunting be they ridden royally .
while tom is hard a - grinding ,
the things that i learned in the long ago
with " go to sleep ! lest santa claus take fright
so great , as for thy pardon were unfit ,
that the warm wonder of their in - woven tresses ,
better - known term , the turnsol -- which continually turns
of facts divulged , wherein appear
god , and far more transcendent than the rest ?
grow up in beauty , as thou dost begin ,
of his own power against the supreme jove , "
collected harry stood awee ,
nec studeat quasi casta loqui ,
that lit the smouldering ashes
eight ' undred fightin ' englishmen , the colonel , and the band ;
the earth that holds so much ...
at the stern himself he seated ,
' tis the pulse of his piping that throbs through
the goats , who have been swift and venturesome
if abigayll his wyfe discrete and sage
all bosh -- when he strips you can see his eye range
the more exhausted , would encrease the more :
since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
the king was chilly autumn , fresh spring the fair young queen .
i can reach the bull's - eye nearer in the dark . "
is't a corpse stuck up for show ,
the thin and shining blossoms , one by one ,
seeth its helm of wisdom rent away ,
could both but once cry , " far thou art ,
it seemed to me like heaven , bein ' there
working , unnoticed , with a single aim ,
or haply some achaian here , thy hand
here the brute harpies make their nest , the same
revel in laughter , think no more of pain !
by all these keen and burning signs
to see the whole condition of that bolgia ,
in the city of lancaster ,
go and bring the lovely maiden
for each will on her neighbour try
departing thence , my guide began to climb
so your heart will be caught and swept out to the ocean
a lurid darkness swallows the array ,
now all is ready , high and low ;
nor fleeting seasons . i shall not wholly perish .
then ran across her memory the strange rhyme
" oh , " said i to him , " from within the dismal places i came this
beware o ' bonie ann ;
and couched on holy grass remain .
pope , his verse excellent , 393 .
while grim in its grinding , soulless mask ,
death 's ramble      hood
away in dim mountains of amber ,
a street .   enter lorenzo and a gentleman , meeting .   they salute ,
gather and squander , are raised
satan gives money .
a certain shape , i wist .
thus i descended out of the first circle
i have caught the moose of lempo ,
myself i 've a weakness for vanity fair .
this life , sae far 's i understand ,
  excluding , of course , the hebrew names .
“ as lofty juno he embraces;--round
this careless summertide ,
cranes darting with disdain on tiny foes ,
the ghosts came thicker , and a spice
through the silence , down the spaces , falling on
when the valiant dankwart / did cast a glance around .
supposed that he had come to dwell ,
and tho ' she smiled , she passed beyond recall .
what can be rendered then as compensation ?
where , in their blessings , all those gods appear .
upward into its dwelling - place , the skies ,
make your peace with the women , and men will make you l. g.
for the clear sky of love seemed overcast
and in the secret darke , that none reproves ,
their wooden walls will be so heated ,
and passion has spent its rage ,
and the dawn brings the fever chills ,
of all temptations ;
boasted wealth a winged shade ,
ye whose wisdom comes from ukko ,
to punish thee , for that no love
yet the light of a whole life dies
blazons undecipherable wisdom
once from the walls your timorous foes engaged ,
descending at the thunderer 's command
crush and defy it !
of their disagreement consists in the variety and irregularity of
seem'd like twa dew - gemm'd lilies fair ;
some humorous coach - horse neighs a ' hallelujah ' !
i know of the sleepy country , where swans fly round
and the green leaves on the tree ,
no keel has ever ploughed that path before ;
one thing in all things , fruit of thine own fruit ,
wilson , we 'll say . we 'll see , perhaps .
of ammunition , and recruits his store .
rang out the hour of nine , the village curfew , and straightway
poets may flourish , or -- perhaps -- they may ;
he dropped his pen in homage to the truth .
the statesman 's slight , the smatterer 's sneer--
to teach him things of heaven and god
and blasting all the kindliness within ,
which is the tyrant spirit of our thought ,
seeking deeper , stiller bowers ,
and teach the world that mystery ,
seems to give forth its light in very scorn
calms back,--the soul re - settles to the life .
this long pain , a sleepless pain--
and i will then speed you on your way . i will make you a noble
scratched me and bit me and fled .
sheltered about
elate with adulation , then
filling her heart with joy and pride ;
to wish well to that adam , our first parent ,
' fair is alexis , ' i no sooner said [ plato ]
now they are lilies , you know .
and see disheartened tyrants mourn ,
that droop above my grave bereft of water .
it fell , riht as it scholde be ,
an me their numbers saw ;
and to thy wordes he gladly shall intende
" who serve me there , and take this word from me :
what good are clocks ,
let us by the fire , etc .
unless a star squeezes through the leaves ,
about me was -- not that , my heart 's desire ,
" the fact has not created in me
making her wild garland as merlin had bidden her ,
" ah , you have said it , " said nash , " and there you know
seek farther , farther yet , oh dove !
seeing those painted countries , and so guess
' er an ' ' er ' usband -- where they live alone .
into the thickest ranks he and turpin
is proof against thy sweet seducing charms ?
of morning -- and the barcan desert pierce ,
creator of all elements , pale mists ,
around thy scalded temples twine
on golden cars , their longing showed .
this wretch to heaven , on earth forsook ,
weren to womanhode , that creature
her bread wus hard corndodgers ; dat meat , i couldn ' chaw .
had carried siegfried , when young , by force to etzel 's
the fainting ones in east and west ,
half an hour or longer
we , two poor monks of waltham abbey , kneel
both harp and voice ; nor could the muse defend
lechis sone his woundis sought ;
your apprehension forms its counterfeit ,
on even terms so may we close .
the quiet of our hearts -- we inly hear
mayre , iii .
and all ripe together , not some of them green
whatever hypocrites austerely talk
an aged woman , poor and gray .
and by the force of twenty is he take ,
which ever round the soul await
lord alfred , scarce knowing ,
the yellow bacon , and the good , brown mead ;
borne by six wearied slaves in open view ,
to charm the terrors of my hearse ;
by the glow of thy golden fruit
he draws a bonnie silken purse
and one was a dream of the new .
i could quote proverbs , did i speak at random :
yes , white hairs are clustering round many a crown ,
" so strange thy outcry , and thy words so strange
i traced him by his lantern light ,
as loth to leave the body that it loved ,
till the hot breath of his nostrils
i , who am shut up , with broken crockery ,
nor for his land did homage , she inly yearn'd to know .
if thou dost not disdain our female praise ,
or bellow of purveyor of fresh fruits ,
thei bothe tornen hom ayein
parents of brave , dead soldiers ,
lest our disreverenc'd deity should rebuke
so near the ground , fly hence , boys , get you gone !
wherof her herte he overcaste
that is regardles of his governaunce .
his creatures , he himself will know .
girt he for travel , with his princely kin ,
who , having two sweet babes , when death takes one ,
their faces white the moonlight stains ,
the united states is the oldest country in the world . many of its
here , unendanger'd in health , wealth , or fame ,
due nourishment , not gluttonous delight ,
answered lively lemminkainen ,
the fiend , whose lantern lights the mead
is mightily shown .
to see the dazzling splendors of a sinful ballet show ;
but if , again , she 's harsh , why , then
salvation shall be preacht , but to the sons
thy head throbs with the fire within thee pent .
until the migrating folk in great multitudes came where
an ' marched round in front of a drum an ' a fife ,
and slays the intruding thoughts , that overleap
when i died the priest denied me burial
let the revels ring ,
be gathered up , without all further aid .
et male conceptos partus peiusque necatos ;
pau'guk , death .
dragons,--the monstrosity of its archings,--the ghostly
of that he wolde , and in such wise
i am so mighty that there 's none can pass ,
' come , fetch me some of your father 's gold ,
sayer of dark sayings in a thousand tongues ,
and his own image from the bank surveys.--pope .
“ megareus was my sire , onchestius his ,
of that dark tree where still the night - bird sang ,
satan paya
of reprobates brow - branded by the lord .
which , with spider - webs all covered ,
where if i were not so tall ,
and a broken neck if you blunder . "
that makes simplicity a grace ;
yea , his own deeds he saw , grown strange and dim
see roland there on his charger swooned ,
with a long beard on his chin :
" married for ages -- it 's just disgusting--
were , " best he thou , triunal deity !
with sudden rust and mould grew dim :
fear not that , while around thee
and you grasp'd my hand , addressing me softly as follows
tells her , how hee lyes languishing in fires
danced at hiawatha 's wedding ,
press'd to those faithful ones;--then tremblingly ,
the empire of the open truth ,
this on his own he never read .
and when the dimming eyes of age
had i a cave on some wild distant shore
of feeling 's glow or fancy 's gleam
martha brier , polytechnic high school , oakland , cal .
  the pay of the army is six months in arrear ; the contingent
then out he slipped in the moonlight ,
make music with me now :
som ' mornin'-glor ' vines have creep eento da shed ,
is harmful not to understand ;
and sate upon the benches , and sitting orderly smote the
such scenes are sweet when even has begun ,
and if it come -- as come it may ,
most glorious ! ye that lead the gliding year
soon dries the rain - drop on the april leaf ! "
my lands and tenements ,
ruth does what simon can not do ;
thy bark with all thy people , seek at once
for her fickle lover 's caress .
" attacked ! " the three men cried in chorus .
were sent to do the dishes ,
in the region of hope , form as many friends as you
come thrilling on the gentle gale ?
not as she prayed the torch was fired ,
her teeth , i presume , were " pearly " :
their friend shall be our friend , our foe whoe'er assails
we will sigh , in conversation ,
curl the still waters , bright with stars , and rouse
he 'd quitted his trade , but retained the good - will ;
shelter'd upon my breast ?
" in distant countries have i been ,
while death and night piled up the naked throng ,
all the immortal fairness of his limbs ;
rarely will she give thee counsel ,
marrying the nymph clymene , was either the stepfather of phaëton ,
now duck their head beneath the wave , now run
.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .
yancuipilla , xii , 3 . new - born babe .
reft was his scull of hair , and no fresh bloom
backed by astolpho , and ascending slow ,
sweetheart , and weary years .
as the moghra trees at noon
and the glinting rays of a rising sun flashed on funnel and
for his sins ' pardon hath he prayed .
' on with the image to its home , ' they cried ,
it was an ancient populist ,
dreamed of the crawling asp and grated tomb ,
that though they pass the breeze 's flight ,
to market , to market , to buy a fat pig
treble that million , and when that is done
but wherefore fail the vandal 's promised bands ?
no carol hymns my debt to you ;
crushes the heart ; since age like winter steals
no heart hath armor so complete
seek a house of doubtful morals ,
' twill be hard if some novelty ca n't be struck out .
until the next morning he riseth againe ;
_ but only love may lead love in _
thus equal loss and equal foil they have .
but when the day had broken through the shades
as now the captive , whom so late i bound
bonnie jim campbell rode up the glen ,
or grant no prayer of mine .
hercules ' name and deeds dost see
drinke ,          dronk , drank ,        drunken , dronken .
she greeted them full kindly / as lofty manner taught ,
who left a pledge behind .
caresses , ton cœur connait la paix profonde des
construct a balloon -- and you 'll do it with ease .
the maid who wove ,
in whose white arms that in love caressed me
distrust in friendship . do ye also ask
with this good offer all at once complied ;
as been bitwixen orcades and inde .
the calender , amazed to see
and sea - blue , sea - deep eyes !
if you bring us such fine meat from the town , e - ho ! "
and love and joyance always came in june,--
makes you wonder will your turn come -- when and how ?
into a net which was set to nab it .
ho , ho ! pale brother , " said the wine ,
and turned his gaze austere
of one beyond a name ,
and we d thee with a worthier mate .
' we can not save it now , '
in whose pure sight all virtue doth succeed .
poetry written during this period has never been equaled
or weryth by his symple wyt , and vanyte
indeed i am -- thwarted , affrighted , chidden ,
the forest depths by foot unpress'd
the innocent blood !   o god ! if thou art love ,
that sin i expiate in this agony ,
bear off his soul . the knight then slays the duke
travels but a little distance ,
lord god of hosts , be with us yet ,
( which for their king the myrmidons had built
he is gathering in his harvest ! "
whose household words are songs in many keys ,
thy sickened children , old guitar ,
rose and dissolved in his nigh fevered brain
that oxford rules the heart of london still ,
and all regathers at the river - heads ,
their drunken franchise shift from scene to scene ,
hic placatus erat , seu quis libauerat uuam
in three minutes more
now you gleam softly triumphant
riots avoid , tho ' mischief none you do ,
upon the verge of bitter weeping ,
but , swooning in that one convulsive bound ,
ocean o'er its reefs and bars
and then the season grows too chill
a city taken by storm , where none are left but the slain .
have heaped the fruits of empire on your knees .
" i shall be gone three years , you will be left alone ;
' n ' starin ' at a wall .
to all true wants time 's ear is deaf ,
to council where the wisest sit .
that weary deserts we may tread ,
yet it must be confessed that at the conclusion of " night nine , "
a collation of the ' bulla ' with the tanner ms . corrects the
then began the trees to level ,
life seemed almost a pleasant thing .
other portals there swing open ,
each master of the arms he bore ,
i only seek to find thy temperate vale ;
men would take refuge in consigning all
a word for the royal ear .
the evening is empty again ;
done great despite and shame unto
_ says vidyāpati : your wish shall be accomplished . _
that love -- real love -- is the only thing in the world .
him like walking - fire sparkling--
and departed in guise of _ bairagi _ avowed !
" thou shalt not covet , " is a wise command ;
that ever saild the sea . "
and my life was safe with the old grey horse .
opposite , and huge hector thus began .
to those who crav'd his aid ;
because my sight , becoming purified ,
or whether he was taken in for damages ,
heavy in heart for balder , to his house ,
and grooved they be . there 's for the horse 's trunk .
dropping , each a hempen bulk .
the king arises , takes his armor off ,
" what are the bugles blowin ' for ? " said files - on - parade .
still burns that sleepless beauty on the mind ;
what lips more suited to those cheeks divine ?
welcome , maids of honour ,
wept for in vain , that op'd the heavenly gates
with tears , and our souls pained
then mum 's the word .
slow as the pausing monarch stalks along ,
long used , untouch’d , in fighting fields to shine ,
my garden - herbs , in fragrance warm ,
thou canst not surely be the same that thou didst seem . "
under conditions that others would stammer in ,
who hug the corpse of some sin undetected ,
some stroke that frightens her to death ,
a joy so sweet ,
fain would i hear thee answer me herein ,
behold , a family had pitched
i learn to pity woes so like my own . "
should suffer any indignity at his hands ; yet in spite of
the watchful argicide , to steal him thence .
her juno finds , and thus inflames her spite :
they walked as they had done the happy summer through .
a riche marchant of the lond
the warmth of a moment like this brings to light .
for out of doubt recruited and fed are we
my frail dust quickened with the breath of life ;
suddenly the trumpet blew ,
the baron dons his peaceful weeds ,
niversity of gottingen ,
of covine and of felaschipe
my dreams that crackle under your breath ...
such from achilles ' burning shield divine
by girls who stand upon the racing team .
from whose forehead shone so bright a diamond ,
the twinkling of shadows enmeshed in the trees ,
but of the other , other rule i make . "
called joyously to her , " we know , we know ,
arc voice of bronze and voice of silver blent
in that hour shall this dead face shine as the face of the sun ,
but ate , in full and plenteous measure ,
who fears annoy or trouble at his hand ;
and o , and o ,
just to see , as she did daily ,
bound is the wretch , but not ' mid grass and flower ,
dear heart -- and have we strength to face the day ?
her mansion in this fleshly nook :
this his wailings testify ,
oration.= edited by william t. peck .
fitting it was that first she shone
shall hast'n , such a peal shall rouse thir sleep .
o ' presses ye will see a raw ,
meanwhile the fitting train
dearest little mother , sweet !
' neath the first glimmer of the evening star .
what johnny and his horse are doing !
sat the ancient mudjekeewis ,
every dollar that he owed , however , sacrificing the
are not nearly so tall as i need .
where he the huge sea - monsters wracks ,
owt he toke thys chyldyryn~ fyve ,
he listened mournfully to her words , and taking from her hand a
breathe o'er my dying brain its last monotony .
has yet a harder task to prove--
his plump white arms and shoulders , enough white
my life is gone , why speak of joy ?
but to have pluck'd one idler by the sleeve ,
serve , serve , serve as a soldier ,
one or the other , mark me well ,
_ for the captain _ , etc .
to the warbling wild notes of the sylvan glen ?
join'd them . the son of tydeus first they sought .
on him , enraged , the fiend , in angry mood ,
with eyes of tender gloom .
and those bright twins were side by side ;
come biondo e giovin paggio .
so that few days exhaust the famished hack .
to that i hope to be .
must they at length to that ill pass have reach'd ! "
which charmed its every grief away ,
for how unpleasant , if it were !
you thumbed , thrust , patted , and polished ,
and mast and sail crash down upon a ship
too much must have an eye to see at last
submit , saves thee . thy ashes make thee rise ;
rifle in all its purity
and almost choked tiburcio camilla ,
whar has you been dis blessed while ?
will i?--god bless you !
exceeding fierce , so that no man can tame him !
of god inspir'd , small store will serve , where store ,
goo - sey , goo - sey , gan - der , whi - ther shall i wan - der ?
viewless obstructions .
what peace they find who there fall fast asleep ,
here 's a sigh for you , then -- but it ends in a smile !
and then grandfather snickers
  _ his captive friend._--before john i. mounted the throne of
and round the room beheld , in order due ,
number two forty - six -- i was rolling in gold ,
that wind about her like a bodyguard .
" she charged   me "
with the wind in the proper quarter .
to the firm centre lays its moveless base .
since then the cow has all her way in there .
but you yourself may serve to show it ,
how would he wish that heaven had left him still
" for the world . " and what shall it profit , when thou shalt have
to the wide world past the river ,
the shepherds came from out the north ,
is he sleeping ?
and all with tears the with'ring herbs bedew .
" thought which now makes me burn , now freeze with hate ,
sleep in the hope of jesus crucified .
such bright hours were not made to stay ;
to the glorious , stubborn struggle
upon the breath of spring my pinions fly .
is non that chaste mai ben all .
the rain is raining all around ,
their vanity and guile and malice .
still vibrates . ' tis a test by which the soul
a third part of the gods , in synod met
the kettle - drum , and far - heard clarionet ,
" we 're rather homely folks , " said he ,
of grecë , whan sche dronken hadde hire draughte .
he comes like phoebus through the gates of morn
and i looked in your eyes and , glowing there ,
in conference , which best might make appear
ca truxo al mundo vn solo bocado ;
for i watched him telling me . )
and he said :   " please close that door .
in rippled circles spreading wide .
beyond the claim of innocence .
b was a bottle blue ,
the celebrated city of miletus , in caria , a   country of asia
can set their chords or pulses thrilling .
" dear me !   do you know any hymns ? "
that day a woman could n't coax him off .
through fringed lids to heaven ;
to that old race that has been thrust
her hair is flying in the wind , her veil is fluttering , her
exchanges of armour ; the most valiant took the best armour , and
" teach her to love her father 's name , maurine ,
presserat hic madidos nobilis uva lacus .
unsullied by the world 's cold strife , its darkness and untruth ,
bless us then with wished sight ,
clouds -- are they bony witches?--swarms ,
the rustling leaves soft whisper o'er his head ,
where thorns and briars rankly crawl ;
" lord , we doubt of this thy will ,
" what shall i say , brave adm'r'l , say ,
his crumbling dust with which the breezes play ,
and dance and toss their rippled manes
seems like the tales a whole tribe feigns
upon his brow her chaplet placed .
all his moral sentences , both here and in all the rest of
whom i took for my future bride .
tune--_"the gude forgi ' me for leein ' . " _
rolf was the speaker , who said , " friends , behold
grey - white placards :   " oyster stew , cornbeef hash , frankfurters " :
but dulness with obscenity must prove
bird , prune thy wing ! nightingale , sing !
for dear wert thou to the fond heart of morian shehone .
martyrs ! who left for our reaping
try over hard to roll the british r ;
the views of lucretius as to the natural origin of life , and the
_ without my love there is no spring _ .
and the wheaten - bread she slices ,
in the evening i lodged beneath the yellow springs .
the anchor heaves ! the ship swings free !
the wet of a salt taste , when by the sea
come tell us old man , as from young men and maidens that love me
the hand would reach at it , but it can not .
" the king 's a _ critic _ ! when have critics known
determined they a welcome will bestow
of all the western stars , until i die .
and must below to join the wretched crew ,
and the petals that shoot in an intricate maze ,
and light with flaring torch .   " haste , haste ! " they cried ,
these all combined cast as it were a spell
go thou forth my tears to gather ,
or others , that we are not always strong ;
the cold night
before achilles , peleus ' son ,
goldsmith , good - natur'd man , shall next defend ,
each art , which thy fond care has tried ,
with thee conversing i forget all time ,
ye may remember what ye will ,
meanwhile the rushing wind grew loud ,
pinguiaque hesperio nectare prela fluant .
my left hand lying on the sheet ;
ah , shouldst thou die from my heart - treachery!--
anything ludicrous or familiar .   he seems always to do his best ;
when thou shalt read , with late remorse ,
then smote together , and each one forthwith
radiant to behold .
kaikeyí urged him on unseen :
who broughtst to light
the gift is wanting .   i am not a painter .
obedient to the prince ’s will .
and cried , " god bless the president ! "
was mute as yabosh , though the goats were slain ;
and time throbs white into another day .
most beautiful and good and wise ,
shall we wake one morn of spring ,
with wheels yet hovering o'er the ocean - brim ,
which , coursing ida , leaves ruin behind
sow the seed , and reap the harvest with enduring toil ,
with the same clearness of evidence , that we discern the simplest
the fate of empires and the fall of kings ;
which a premier gives to one who wishes
but can not emulate .
how dare the robins sing ,
and who lives in that far - secluded cot ?
that the star - gazers , having writ on death ,
who live but for the honour of their race .
their rights to prove , their shares to claim ;
to greet thee coming , ' companied by gods ,
spread thick around his chin .
where is gerins and his comrade gerers ?
that duty , sire , you have taught us all our lives .
this wondrous landscape of the morn ,
on one who lived and died where he was born
scroll in his hand . _ ]
" durn him ! " said billy , with stifling anger ,
as if a tainted corpse were nigh them .
and here , pent up in some deep hollow ,
it may be that i a part of my youth
and on one side the desert blows ,
with eddy and whirl
within the fort beleaguered round ;
what force has formed this masterpiece of awe ?
revolving winter came at last ;
the darling and pride of the flower of finae ?
she saves herself by her heels ,
and injury for food , and set to bind
that i thi while aquite may ;
i wo n't describe ; description is my forte ,
dead palsy - sick of all my chiefest parts ,
thus nature 's volume , read aright ,
nor e'er forsake pure wisdom 's sacred path .
rose from the crowd ; the bright procession fared
i shall try my little strength
" i may not , " said gan , " your grace gainsay .
procure of steel the strongest screws ,
ciliaw ni orug er caledi gawr ,
passion - dimmed eyes and long heavy hair
the winged seeds , where they lie cold and low ,
' oh , pleasant are the primrose buds
coming in sight of each other , then swerving and flowing asunder ,
sounds a loud conch , convokes a scaly band ,
and he , who knew not then ,
though a pun and a joke
notion of _ astonishment _ implied , connecting it with ἀγητός . ]
now , when my darling kissed not me ,
and swept the forests from the shaded plain
for else what booteth that celestiall ray ,
up the water and over the lea ,
the old command still holds us , the old flag is our one flag ,
" hero and king ( ulysses thus replied )
who breaks his brave letters so tremulously
hesperus entreats thy light ,
this done , the man full swiftly ran ,
ordain for a trial those axes that he would set up in a row
neither the fountain nor river is seen on it ,
powers most illumined , wilder'd in the theme .
but ’ tis our ancient tartan plaid
but here come a group whose deplorable faces ,
his praise , who out of darkness called up light.--v . 166 - 79 .
six daughters had she , and six stalwart sons ;
with these words your greeting be :
and all its finer inspiration caught ;
and the trees talk together
i have n't a sign of an egg in my nest ,
enormous night arise ,
“ why dar'd ulysses through the watchful guards
where our brothers fought and bled ,
not alone thy brother 's meadows
but , o indulgent , come not nigh
who ne'er had notion or desire
_ lover . _ i 'll question thee before i go--
is forto sette a king in evene
poor old man !
their undeclining circles drew ,
but a light so brave , and a gleam so true ,
tranquil soaring towards our heaven of hope .
when our lives are glad and sweet .
cock makes its voice heard each moment ? it is to tell
for it had made them what they were : the power
i could wake a winter night
and tell me , if he thinks of me !
wine will fill our hearts with cheer !
and now had greece eternal fame acquired ,
lake and river break asunder
circumstances in which he is situated , and his knowledge of his
i dreamt i saw thee , robed in purple flakes ,
never had i comrade so valiant and so true . "
a pot of tea , a piece of toast,--and thou ... _ ]
height above height , deep below deep , respond !
in liquid drops of melting tears enrolled ,
pitiless eyes would freeze her secret in her !
seems recompensed , forever
no dawn -- no dusk -- no proper time of day--
why alice was so late .
she meaneth the will absolute , and i
my light , a little trembling , in the grey .
for there 's luck in odd numbers , " says rory o'more .
to drink up infamy ?
safe ! safe ' though all the fiends of hell
because in former days we us'd them well!--
and under the guns he ran .
panting for breath , his murrian in his hand ,
some say no evil thing that walks by night ,
dau rydd yn nydd cad eu cyfergyr ,
like daffodils that die with sheaths unbroken ?
from circumstance each draws a different hue .
you are a child , maria .
though the rudest hand assail her ,
immo , etiam taedet , taedet obestque magis ;
her paint was deeper than the depth
now up the nave of that majestic church
the fractur'd thigh , the knee , the wound in the abdomen ,
quem non lancea militis ,
or dripping clothes around them fold :
blest powres forbid , thy tender life
apart from the sombre wood ;
an endless path before me leads away ,
' far lovelier , neater , and nicer
ward , on verse of cowper , 240 .
through winds and tides one compass guides,--
.     .     .     .     .
but as for me , i buy because
such strange amazement hung , the voice expir'd
the next was a kite a cruel enemy to all small birds .
earth .
skilled workman whom minerva has instructed in all kinds of
three other soldier blokes ' n ' me packed
o'er the cruel roll of war drums
mingle soft singing with the ocean 's roar .
did prompt obedience ' sure reward e'en with the toil begin ?
give signs of " yes , " and misery 's overflow
and may therefore be considered as an ethereal fluid , though
wouldst thou fashion the song , o ! poet - heart ,
burnt green , and blue and white .
broke the bondman 's heart for bread , poured the
but paused a moment , to watch with wonder
|                                  |
the tongues of penticost ; as , distant heard
open thine ears and hear what i forebode .
the shroud back from his eyes and lips ,
an ' go a - gunnin ' fer sparrers
alas !   i murmured , that the year should borrow
as , with twenty bleeding wounds ,
come in the evening , or come in the morning ;
till some one called for dad mcguire .
they 've wrang'd the lass of albany .
of british natures , wanting its excuse
but shove the tumbler through the town ,
ofttimes i 've waited here an hour or two .
the glorious land of maple tree ,
before all temples th ' upright heart and pure ,
where my first and my second have stablished their place ;
wainamoinen , ancient minstrel ,
in his own palace rear'd ; and when he reach'd
das jetzt noch klingt ?
theyr myght is small , theyr cunnynge is moche lesse
his mother and aunts lived at an old - fashioned house in a very
of angels guided , nigh that loathly den :
then answer thus the shadowy form return'd .
and nursed his little earnings , sure though slow ,
fierce pains infixing , but external wounds
_ mirt . _ and i a sheep - hook will bestow ,
the moon fled out of the skies ,
mine are the faded flowers .
they heard , and turned them from the court
while sullen winter 's dull imprisoning days
this is ole woman 's talk , an ' you be'ind
indulgences , dispenses , pardons , bulls ,
such i became as those that , not comprehending that which is
massy and deep , and banded and bestarred
and heavier fall :   so should i purchase dear
where wisdom thron'd , and all the graces shine ,
for alway siththe more and more
mark too the earth by outland tillers tamed ,
the encumbered chariot from the dying steed :
" awhile at the offers of mercy you spurned ,
though perhaps not so to me .
unless they can mak them content ;
although the proofs were clear :   this as it might ,
or though i warily conceal
discordant from a moistened drum .
to walk somewhere . and all that day she waited .
was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep .
where precious moments came at break of day ,
supreme , imperial in her place .
here is the mill with the humming of thunder ,
how glowing guilt exalts the keen delight !
on sundry points , i blush to say ,
she only shook her head and smiled .
how pure , how dear their dwelling place .
" there is no water can supply them
to swell in wealth , or yield unto mischance .
and his will is our peace ; this is the sea
but a ' the marvels that afore he 'd seen
he dogs the secret footsteps of the heavens ,
haste thou whither i may send thee ,
and to accept your sorrows silently ,
he called his man of stitches ;
who all so wild ,
we may be sad to - morrow ;
goes down in de gloomerin ' meadows
wonderous , and hence that power was given he found ;
to the sweeter mead of kalew .
and the croaking of frogs in the rushes ,
i sigh'd for one i 've never seen .
" yonder , calm as a cloud , alcott stalks in a dream ,
i feel a creeping toward me -- a soft head ,
hard they rowed and ever forward ,
if the worst is bound to happen ,
and we who vainly boast her rightful sway
a servant went to fetch demodocus . the fifty - two picked oarsmen
did ye see no more o ' my true love ? "
vincula quem solvunt , quam bene tutus erit !
this universe , and all created things .
and wrung my soul ; and from my heart it drove
quickly grows the young whelp up ,
" is this thy passport to the lord ? "
seen king harry 's chapel at westminster ,
but let the human woman go !
by this the northern wagoner had set
spring - born feelings from my heart welled ,
and drink in thy beauties with constant delight ;
whole streets , reform'd , the great assembly join ,
still doth she love her beautiful consort .
with many an horn and many a route ,
and see them leave their thousands slain ,
abenddammerung,(ger . ) - evening dim light ; twilight .
a twilight - piece .   love , we are in god 's hand .
came equipped with spears and arrows ,
o flouds ! o fires ! o suns ! o showres !
that streams from out the fountain of the eye ,
dauntless let our courage be ,
and began to speak in this wise :
among the lesser lights : a patriot skill'd
do n't you cry ;
gazed on the lake below .
we see a man at he s a haase ,
the quiet life as best ;
now that with wonderment his followers spy
hush ! could it be?--a faintly murmured word ,
had gone into the hidden house of death .
" i have no hoarded treasure ,
and fight of heroes thronging ,
with mountains and forests and streams ,
of ' such a pleasure , ma'am , and such an honour , '
there was a most magnificent variety ,
now nae langer sport and play ,
she had a brother , and a tender father ,
and bear away the body ; while behind
the best is yet to be ,
the soles were burning , whence the flexile joints
so i forced my way into the room , and there the youngster lay ,
on a short pruning - hook his head reclines ;              }
love , more than immortality ;
silence fell for a moment , then was heard
where your wishes ' haughty fleet was wrecked ,
forbidding every bleak unkindly fog
the apple on the tree ,
whose little eyes glow
then exploded -- and afterwards , what smells !
brunhild the fair maiden , / red grew she in wrath :
clark 's complexion invariably grew more sultry
of antique make far in the kyffhaeuser ,
to body 's need nothing save body , dwells
his heart kept vigil by the little house
materials , such as silver , perhaps in filagree work . ‘ calathi ’
of silken sea - roads down the golden west
you shall have a handsome husband ! "
an end for me ,
the mother and her babes must part ,
and talked in their sleep -- and every word
with much resemblance of the past ,
honest david has always a dish of the best ,
and still she , swift pursuing , sped
give warning to the world , that i am fled
i see a million creatures fall .
the dearest thing on earth to me
and sang with burns the hours away ,
her of the honey throat , and peachy pout ,
when the two sisters go to fetch water , they come to this spot
“ but soon , disliking on the self - same rock
where a people primeval is vanishing fast ,
and unrequital , thrid the maze of sound ;
light and life and love are with me ,
siderei proceres ducitis ; arma , viri !
but chief , oh tell me ! ( what i question most )
her hand , five slender snow - white birds .
was i worth thy word : live !
and zigzag style did not awake ,
thou hast the burning and the head that aches ,
there is a coldness in the air ,
heard the voices of men through the mist , the rattle of cordage
or the child 's star adorn heaven 's forehead now .
they by some pebble summon'd would reply
but when our faith and works fall down
high o'er the heavens wert thou borne , to stand
and it brought many tears in the eyes of the school ,
how without charm wilt thou draw ,
in spite of false lights on the shore ,
who unto their country / fain their leave had ta'en ,
her needles still , her hands upon her lap
i sit in the saddle ,
as common fame was pleas'd to say ,
we prize the union , thou canst save it now
swift 's verses on _ vanbrugh 's house _ , 1706 .
shall we still
joanna southcote 's shiloh , and her sect ,
while thus , the moor his faithful tale reveal'd ,
although thine eyes a kingdom may surprise ;
too fondly meant to mitigate his grief .
they grew in beauty side by side
how many scenes of what departed bliss !
and phyllis , neat handed , is laying the tea - things .
no more with sorrow view thy glory 's stain ;
horrenda late nomen in ultimas
the minister himsel ' will shüne
with the air of benediction and the heaven of love .
liv . fierce volscens raves with anger , nor espies
there is a shy and native grace
to guard the ship . seek we the sacred shades
she strayed and strayed and strayed and strayed
seeing thy more than human loveliness
" will neptune ( vulcan then ) the faithless trust ?
day of trial , with what sorrow
lawful fighters or scamps from jail ,
ni fydd goeg gweddi _ cynllo _
with lullaby thy doubts appease ;
the clouds , as through the air they quickly pass ,
that metaphor ! and feel
round thy beautiful form ; thousand times kiss'd i thy neck .
saleable at what price soe'er ye will .
smote where the gauntlet husked the nervous wrist ,
drop unawares , unheeded tears .
as ' undetected plagiarism , '
only moon 's conscience , we confess ,
then with its booty covered and begirt me . "
confus'd and indistinct at length are heard .
by t. c. de leon . octavo , cloth bound . with one hundred and fifty
for yonder jamie does us meet ;
all the humours he discloses
that forto speke of fleisch and bon
and shame to fortune , placed the diadem
three times thrice .
or harry stephens coveted his own .
and he was to be clerk
ye shall go with me ;
he ceas'd ; and th ' archangelic power prepar'd
pascentes dapibus pectora mysticis .
they haue bett me fuaesaes sore.aeuro(tm )
through the great press he goes again to strike ;
who bore his spear and shield :
what thou requirest .   yet one doubt remains ,
pale as the glimmer of stars on moorland meres
broider'd the ground . " ]
other be greater , more disgustful none
all those designs are but to prove
a prophet 's words can never fail--
like currents journeying through the windless deep .
cclxxxviii . to mrs . riddel . her caprice
visión nocturna grave ,
to snatch the first kiss , touching thy heart with silent
o frail and puny woman ! could you know
a sudden madness , and fierce rage awoke
young ( one ) 's night thoughts
and , followed by my noble pair
and sworded seraphim ,
and , looking at his master , seemed to say ,
maxwell 's history of dumfries and galloway may be consulted for
_ raucle _ , rash , stout , fearless , reckless .
heaven with earth is banded :
tho ' poor my lot in some small cot
thy place among the wine ?
with a rent - roll that told of my houses and land ,
truly to him who with me subtilizes ,
but there are wanderers o'er eternity[je ]
in my sleep i was fain of their fellowship , fain
no more my heart , dear mother .   he ,
whom the healing flood comes near ,
all through a winter 's night ,
but now is wielded by his greater friend .
and the copper mountain 's entrance ,
and try to catch a fly .
there 's a spark that starts a - glowin '
each in her festal gown .
or will it serve at last ?
correspondence between a lady and gentleman .
from illinois , come to see him about her sick boy
yet my sadness thou well knowest ,
oh be the new as kind !
too faithfully my heart retains the day
we have four here to board , great good - for - nothings ,
which heroes feel in equal fight . ”
thus they . aghast he laid the weapon down ,
every day fresh blossoms blow
and read the printed words upon that page .
bold launcelot , chaste galahad the dark
again will pardon me what i omit ,
clinched in my grasp , till beauty hath it none--
and coming found the rampart overthrown ,
what profits me tho ’ i sud be
how once , beneath the enamored moon ,
a lightning impulse run .
grew scrawnier and plainer ;
then they rose up and departed
that their lands are wondrous toothsome .
what could the muse herself that orpheus bore ,
we saw your dead uncoffined lie .
lest , through desire to live a little longer ,
by the cruelty deaf as a fire
and passe away , like to a sommers shade ;
of many things in few :
of such i have plenty to - day ;
and down he threw his glove :   the thing
bitterly , calling the dread erinyes to witness . he prayed that no
worthily dear ; for sure so stout at need
by me upheld , that he may know how frail
where many masters rule ; let one be lord ,
their wonted quiet rest enjoy ;
see me now his faithful minion,--
at random into the volume , and applying the line to which chance
spare the hard earnings of the poor ,
and answered with disdainful smile--
my subject song . do thou protect apace
i that tremble at your feet
" launcelot and guinevere , " " endymion , " and many other
fly from the house of dust ,
send us the hearts of our fathers of old !
poor fellow ! his was an untoward fate ;
at length the prize so madly sought ,
e'en though i ne'er could find thy nose
and airy joy , along the mountain side ,
and when high noon hast gaind , & when thou fallst .
had for their own her maidens , / of the best of gold
or to command his stormy spirit down .
ere its good task to disengage the knot
ah me ! this many a year
and lard , as you the occasion see ,
.     .     .     .     .
" this plan of ours , my comrades , we must straight give o'er ;
of proud desires ,
when proud patrician chariots rolling fast
the youth setting out on the journey of life , and
those reavers shall not in your land remain . "
once bless our human ears ,
why wilt thou turn away ?
till mopsa , with her puddle dock ,
have oneness of necessity and good .
flew o’er the field , nor hurt the bearded grain :
i ne'er intended it should go thus far ,
unburdens my bosom of ills .
or how from joining stones the city sprung ,
o vánar king , the thankless man
i bare my head and hail the stars and stripes ,
but she may go home in a coach and three . "
where lay an axe with half burned heft
withinne his herte he wiste als faste
the sun unfolds his flowing locks , between
our aged father and to soothe his pain ,
to gloat upon sir stodge 's rout .
when it is said ,
full of pity as may be ,
six weeks of absence have i borne
ah ! can there ought on earth rejoyce !
virtue had , and moved her sphere .
and her belt and her neck were deeply embroidered
' sons now we are of god , ' as we have heard ,
on the white sea - gull 's wing , and gazing round ,
bot forto prinche and forto spare ,
who s good thou schalt have evene half . "
thus addressed the coming strangers :
we have it only when we are half earth .
and the broad heath - land , where the nights sink down
" oh rank , how thy glories would fall disenchanted ,
with hearts abrim ,
sure stands the word ; and now attend and hear ,
accentuated in the authors . let us hope that the four muses of
so tranquil , and steady , and clear were its beams ,
rain 's fountain - head , the magazine of hail ;
give the barber a pinch of snuff .
though it was rough and tangled , too ,
all christians may have play ;
all night they feast , the greek and trojan powers :
is what the curious mind shall know ,
in his sledge of iron sat him ,
but his sick bed i did amuse ,
urguet utrimque latus nemoris , medioque fragosus
he wing'd his way , now cloth'd with yellow plumes
though the clouds obscure the sky ,
i lay quite still with lips sealed ,
soon as the sun dispelled the chilly night ,
or wander far above the city walls ,
by what of firm land on this side appears ,
down upon the poet 's cheek .
unfashion'd , untormented into man ?
that all - unearthly , untaught strain !   he saw
so mad argantes fared , when his proud heart
as one who , walking in his sleep , awakes
fails , and he sinks in mortal agony .
so far as i know , but a tree and truth .
i need not say he loved a maid--
that on can and that other mai ,
herald sad and trumpet be ,
holding joy not impossible to one
the monarch frowned , by passion moved
oh , then he spied her ain dear lord ,
till homeward we must turn at last , or ere the daylight dies ,
another spoke , " for such demands ,
resolve their purpose to fulfil ,
such wedded souls our god shall own
how they sweep down and out ! how they mutter !
into the darkness and the hush of night
with earth hidden and heaven hidden ,
basks at the fire his hairy strength ,
your heart and robbed you of your right mind , that you fight the
which i would give my soul to paint .
and the fire - pike was among them ,
and touch thy garments ' hem :
will not forsake him in avilion ,
on its fair surface bore its pavement high :
my restless wandering may have the greatest worth ! " _
o'er its head he drew the arrow ,
for summer has o'er - brimm'd their clammy cells .
there is a dungeon , in whose dim drear light
long , long ago , and now i fear
the least little part , and his power
" ah ! " returned my gentle fair ,
when the sun came up , she saw with grief
manuscript which he at first put into the hands of
for since our solid is triple , but always
that day we spoke a little , timidly ,
how justly does thy power its dooms invent !
the glance that lightens , and the smile that burns ;
we crystal - hunters speed along ;
when gibing neighbors make " the ghost " their theme
all her heart 's tumult beating white and red ,
where conversations of the eyes
the little room where you and i
which that house and heath and garden made dear to thee erewhile ,
shriek from the car :   " mon dieu ! "
broken in battle was beowulf 's sword ,
of time and suffering has effaced the stain
then to his music : and his song
and the cabbages grow round it , planted for greens ;
i mean to have a bout ,
come to the vine - hung woodlands hoary ,
............ and fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess ,
as , bowing to thy sovereign will ,
the keeper appointed by juno , charmed by the sound of this new
and , more than i am wo nt , i rein and curb
but how can i forget you with the flowers in your hair ? "
but slowly on its way doth force .
keep silence fur yo ' betters!--don't you heah de banjo talkin ' ?
and several artists claimed attention there ,
bot riht sone after that sche was .
and i work to the livelier tune that they sing :
as fancy wills , the path beneath
full in our view , that nearer we might hear
in its dull retreat ,
compressed its god in mortal mould ,
is gone forever !
with all the mastery of sovran might ?
the north - wind tears from ev'ry tree
--vigorous seamen whose adventurous mind
the first element is wanting
and some who seemed but ill to brook
whene'er good fortune lets me ,
" would tommy please come and take supper with her ? "
give away her gowns ,
fosterer of discord .
their merry music that resounds from far ,
week in , week out , from morn till night ,
from the wheat - malt honey - seasoned ,
still in the dying darkness , still in the forest dim
for so to friend as stranger , noxious are
to move away the ringlet curl
that she for whose dear sake my heart had bled ,
i count you the paragon , call you the pink .
far - scattered shine the cyclades renowned ,
craft 's cankered courage changed culloden 's cry ;
i noticed each time a vast pride in the fact that she had been so
in everlasting numbers , like the theme ,
was lost in higher yearnings .
they saw some boys at play .
what his own age reproved , and deem'd a crime ,
and see ! she stirs !
" pulses ' maddening play " perform all . his songs are , in general ,
kullervo , kalervo 's offspring ,
before her old grandmother
at this unruly time of year ,
fixed upon mine , and heard such groans as yet
her wern't afeerd at livin ' alone , an ' many a tale is told ,
and with something at her side ;
love had he found in huts where poor men lie ;
pyraechmes led the paeonian archers from distant amydon , by the
the eyes that on it gaze .
f is for frank , who is mending his pen .
spend the glittering moonlight there
there was a piper had a cow ,
thus , by his losses , multiplies his store ;
and with a regal song sun - crown this age ,
then pealed the notes , omnipotent to charm ,
and might have interfered with that brave youth 's
the flowers in their hair are pale and faded ; the notes are
the rose was plucked when dusk was dim
come along , ben and claire ;
there is thy gold . i will not break the spell ,
their willing hearts , as if reveal'd
" when the hand trembled to receive
i soon wad worry them a ' !
since that , i 've wiser been ,
and laugh at me , and stare !
on me that sche miscaste hire yhe ,
illius ad tumulum fugiam supplexque sedebo
and now , escaped the fury of the storm ,
then up the will , and doth her weakness plague
the winds ' , the birds ' , the ocean - floods'--
all the world may stare and never know
and , as yow list , ye maken hertes digne ;
while aye thy virgin flower preserved its bloom ,
ready to join , as well our hearts as hands .
all equal in their width , and circular each ,
low , clay - built huts , behold , and reedy sheds ,
as might confound the atheist 's sophistries .
lume , a loom .
he 's been haunted by the spectres of the geebung polo club .
her coats tucked up , and all her motions just ,
who longs to reach the radiant plain
all buried things broke upward ;
amazement confronts him with images dire ;
who here proceed , instruct me , if thou see
naples , where he is hostage for his sire ,
" can not forge for thee the sampo ,
on the green sward , where flickering sunbeams glide ,
of all the stones i ever met ,
we hate , and old wrongs lift their faces ,
but her ambition never reached to roast .
the dozen peers are nothing short of that ,
should try this charm on whom ye say ye love . '
dost thou not , impious , upon thy heart
he whom i trusted , he alone could strike--
as there by her maidens / debonair was worn :
he forced my eyes to meet his ,
" what reason here discovers i have power
in the missal , my mother her weeping child gave ,
carol , carol , we have come
ulysses , seated in the midst , the call
how the god apis really was a bull ,
not without heavy grief of heart did he
and last i thought of that fair isle which sent
" ah me !   o satan !   satan ! " loud exclaim'd
whether i live or die ,
a waistcoat , straiter than the fashion !
and feasted amidst of the winter
my city please thee , blame it as they may .
the saucy subjects still will bear the sway .
through the thunders , athwart the storm ,
verses left in the room where he slept
on india ’s burning sand ;
on which , equipt with logistilla 's rein ,
  " i 've measured it from side to side ;
like infants left , at last shall cry ,
until through tears they hail their blessed home ,
the churchyard ghost , is now at rest again ;
turn ! lest they say a lesser light distraught thee .
the day shall have its due .
comes the night .
led kepler to the music of his laws ,
lean of flank and lank of jaw ,
of bursting thunders , slumbered there ;
thou lifts thy unassuming head
first with the prodigy , his brother 's change ,
new in a world grown old to morns .
over and in and on the sea ,
in every wind it murmured , and i knew
i never knew any more beautiful than you :
' e showed no sign excep ' to grow more grim .
weed the garden , carry wood ,
even to wonder , did not the safe word
since yorkshire hills are green ,
thou shalt hear the woodland streams
so that i led her to the glass ,
no sooner to my list'ning ear had come
no fears have they , but at their ease eject
they shall never know
close to her ear touching the melody;--
our fancied steps . o faithful wife
a giant now , and straight an elf ,
in the pasture cold and cheerless ;
to wrap me in its garments fold .
by thy wild and stormy steep ,
from a warm land far away ,
and help it to grow through golden hours .
' tis the first that lifts out of the waters
yea and æneas ' very self is of their fellowship ,
full of small snow the mighty wester blew .
christmas comes but once a year .
winged is each heart , and winged every heel ;
“ now welcome , welcome home from ting ,
confronted .
she stood before the tent , a winging tent
the far sea calls .
if i could go to some far land ,
how moche you try ,
slow looks , where pride yet struggles , crida rears ;
but round the steepy rocks and dangerous strand
from street to street , not loud , but through the night
to harvest the fruit of my hand ,
the ancient wood is white and chill ,
the baby is crying ,
and , fleet as any heifer ,
electric light , and even drains ,
are nameless graces which no methods teach , }
with every sweetest turf shall bind ,
an empty plain , a steely pond , a distance diamond - clear ,
whom you had bid buy cattle . near fair head
now all the world is sleeping , love ,
where heart - felt goodness was employ'd ,
there crouching , paris , fair - hair'd helen 's lord ,
is dull and shrivelled ere its race is run .
of which a man like browning was not unaware .   for
every brutal jest and jeer ,
chests and cases , trunks and boxes ;
by deep resentment stung , who seem'd to say :
yet they did not to this at once attain ;
from the cool cisterns of the midnight air
in country shades , or to some cell
ship after ship , the whole night long , their high - built
genius -- it discovered , in fact , the antithesis between talent and
that ' ops about ? i 've seen 'em in the strand
and yet i seek not to be grand nor witty ,
nor is murthagh less plased with the evint than _ i _ am ,
him alone i wish to marry .
and , as i swam for life ,
how populous , how vital , is the grave !
writing despatches ) in their several stations ,
to virtuous learning , did by law designe
i shall put no flowers at his head ,
' so spake i , and their high hearts consented thereto . so
conspire to teach the boy . to these succeed
time 's garden
time will bring you your reward ,
assuring him hector will soon lie lifeless at his feet .
this all - involving recompense .
and live as lives the knave ,
stifling hope and love and peace ,
and glancing on the window , when the gloom
but he begs to propose , in the interim
beait me to death for hope of an unfound booty upon me .
the roar of the stormy sea
and when a master commands , i have been train'd to obey .
nor the scarcity of women .
timekeeper there , walked with him to the rail
where to live near
above my arts
will come , when she must feel the pow'r
had lost forever its ravenings .
sodden , and chafed and aching ,
touched with a glory that never grew old .
and will not let me sleep .
amin . o rare !   but is't a trespass , if we three
tell thee of the times primeval ,
upon a limp or broken stem .
whose comelie swelling , when my hand distreines ,
and make his face a mask .
and later tossed aside with scorn ;
to whom hast thou e'er
( he lost the charter of our rights)--
from agramant ?   that not without his aid
or perils in the city or the sea ,
" so may thy lineage find at last repose , "
but since they had left the poor seamen to fate ;
vainly rings thy mighty anvil ;
twas cause enough for death that they could die .
no voice says aught ; no spark of light
when on a hill ( whose high imperious brow
and , ere the wheat is ripe , why lies her gold
bring my friend the bill ! "
washed in the lambent waters of the sun .
seek their black ships , and clear the crowded strand ,
come ye attones and do as i haue said
shall after his fury , repent his mad foly
not venturing yet to peck their destin'd meal ,
shared in thy boundless sympathies , and then--
divorced old barren reason from my bed ,
over the ægean 's blue
what thing hem were best to done ,
the emerald - amber mosses clot ;
" though they be one to ten ,
of theirs are blent in them ;
and my might and power are over all !
and sought _ that _ beauty , which , as milton says ,
from camp to camp , through the foul womb of night ,
secondary schools , with critical introductions , notes , etc .
" so you 're bound to go to court ? "
still praying that she ne'er might cause a pain ,
curtains of pink silk fluffy troubling the skin
before her feet flew flutt'ring long .
" build me a dome , " said aladdin ,
until all virtue had been torn away ,
and cryptogamous plants fulfil the elk ,
and thence with lustre , more or less , it shows
nor through the shadeless glare can see ,
eke ech at others threw the flowres bright ,
they cluster there as thick as swarming bees ,
she was lying , the beloved ,
the fair is over , let the people troop ,
wraps her shoulders in an old blue shawl .
here , here on earth i find it all--
= michelet.=--life of luther : written by himself . collected and
a pleasure for the men -- the which meseems
behold , the dishes due appear !
a line of fire , that parts the dusky plain ,
" but what can ladies do ,
into his solitary lair ;
satisfy the cid , therefore , alfonso and twelve of his men took a
happy at midnight ,
all his life he had less than average attainments in knowledge ,
the lilies of the field , whose bloom is brief--
now in wanton mazes dancing ;
phrygian evanthes then he slays , and mimas , whiles the friend
conservative country .
and why he ca n't break through ;
he scarce can lift himself
the snowy lily with the blushing rose !
pr . there is , o king , fire on the earth this day :
unperceived , but no less there ,
and our shrine is a bank of sod ,
“ from proud olympus ' brow , i veil'd the god ,
in a steaming sweat , it is fine to see
passing breeze is sweet .
' old bard 's wish , ' ' the song of the owl , ' and , perhaps , ian lom 's
the lad 's story showed hearty sympathy with him ,
in plundered land should hardly find
of beauty from the light retired ;
into the head , as doth the slug his horns .
vices eschewe for the loue of one
with ivy wreathe their brows ; and in their hands
i would my body lay beside their own ! "
but melancholy , weeping , and distressed ,
lost vale , and lost maiden !
let this not seem an anti - climax:--'oh !
i nestled him soft to my throbbing breast ,
clasping dead infants to her milkless breasts ;
is it too late , then , evelyn hope ?
fair face not all unhappy , and the robes
last birthday i weighed thirty - three!--an ' i weigh thirty yet !
from island to island like sea birds we roam ,
performance , has an equability and propriety , which he afterwards
taught both by what she shows and what conceals ,
by the love , which o'er the feet
even at noonday , i will you safely guide ,
and whispered when the rain beat .
in silence , solitude and stern surmise
ague in its cold fit , they fill'd their boat ,
as ' twere in one capacious tub .
while they kindly persuade them they ca n't avoid fate .
of noble anger seem'd he !   to the gate
of both armenias ; and the pontic hordes ,
approach'd , and whence he came inquir'd , to whom
such a constant lover .
blessèd for ever , cradle dear ,
i know not any more how long it is
remembering what the angel had said
bursts radiant on the evening sky
i own the truth of heaven ’s decree .
but i shall die a living death ? o thought
we think so then , and we thought so still !
they paid in red blood for their lands ;
fools ! that oppose his one sc[=i]entific intelligent hope !
ruddy kirtles they have
this is the worst that you can say ,
when of tender mind and body
so nations , whose lost anchorage must pay
long to endure this torpidly , and shun
she did not speak , she did not stir ;
all of thine own kindred / are gracious unto me ,
on oliviero bade his blessing be .
may tear up all the tender ties of life ;
with peace and long delight , " and laid
which came in the beginning , was not changed ;
and the dear little ducklings that toddled
spirit of knowledge , grant me this :
fly the country ; whereas we have been killing the stay of a
where once that angel - painter trod
' tis but to go and have been . '--come , little bark ! let us go .
( father ) slay his son , but let my fosterlings be spared . "
one coin to rescue or to ransom thee .
system , of which by a strange and natural antithesis , it has been
fridli said , of bergalingen .
o gin my wife wad speak hooly and fairly !
" and -- hark , how sweet the love - song flows ! "
but they who use it must be judgment - fixed ,
oft hangs the parent whom she loves .
and , coming straight to sarum close ,
a wondrous beauty drew me on ,
for though i fled him angrie , yet recall'd
to bring thee dreams of home .
or to his limbs , his utmost struggling vain ,
no place assign'd , but wheresoever chance
how oft , a vigorous man , i lay
fill the fiery brains of young men ?
at dodge city an unknown hand threw in a copy of a kansas paper
i beg you listen to this advice--
there you 'll find six golden girdles ,
hark ! the redemption hour 's resounding stroke ,
due boundaries of realms from nature won ,
came ower their sunny dwellin ' ,
the paradise poems are the first poems in his final war
unto thy fear ; whatever power he sways
thus restored to youth and beauty ;
from cal to cha , from cha to con
the golden atoms of the day ;
poor jane had scarce become a wife ,
iussit et inclusam sentibus esse rosam ?
were saluted with pleasure from every part .
" me thus low down my flatteries have sunk ,
because thy hand , that stayed for naught ,
and o'er the stile went singing .
how many hairs will make a wig ?
none that be kindred , none companion to me ,
although thy curse be as the shoreless sea ,
already you have scorch'd your wings :
i hope you here will still reside .
he said ; " and i 'm glad to give it , for true ! "
has talked of sir geoffrey 's estate ;
but turning now and then to speak with him ,
the youngsters out of doors and free .
brave heads there be that harbour the distinct
live all those days appointed mine !
bloody ground .
the glorious sun began to rise ,
i can do with my pencil what i know ,
she placed a scroll -- a portrait -- in his hand ;
could prove ; whose head in crested helmet hid ,
and give me leave to knock him out
so eager to pass o'er , as i discern
and with her soft , bright eyes looks down
so that i straightway opened all the sluices
there were bevies of birds and swarms of bees ;
and spots , where still a beauty clings ,
a giant 's spirit in each pigmy frame ,
thou show'st that same grave aspect everywhere ,
that was not built for gross , material gains ,
noisome the earth is , that receiveth this .
so when he wakes his thoughts shall dwell
and , still , as he layeth his crosier about ,
like a claned up sarvice coor ;
you 'd go home in an ambulance .
tendrils and leaves , upon her .   " who supposes
conqu'ring the highland regions to the sea ;
i hear you whispering there , o stars of heaven--
ruling all of right and wrong .
ye hills , near neighbours o ' the starns ,
the monarch 's brow in a veil of clouds--
the sounds re - echoed from the roof and walls
they their silver voices gave thee ,
sat one of name as high to hear ,
where the white pond - lilies teeter ,
he , down the water , gies him this guid - e'en:--
and he lay on the flowered sward ,
if heaven had but assign'd us
so i 'll meet ' i m later on
far from the woods where sweet birds sing ;
still , radiant eye , upon the canvas dwell ;
vayu[fn#24 ] thou art , and he who keeps the prison
in his bed at night .
a solemn fast was called , the courts were closed ,
my noble kinsman saw with grave applause
shortening sleeves , legs , and tails to her limbs ;
below your cracked window red raspberries climb ;
scarcely was a quarter 's payment
and praise the annihilation of the pit .
put his arm round her waist ,
  when darius laid siege to babylon , one of his lords , named
and court the flower that cheapens his array .
which , in the spangles of their tinsell'd weeds ,
waiting for thee . "
star - fish fingers held the water . . .
bound and plumed with scented grasses ,
the gentle and fortunate peace :
stand both for camp and fleet . nor could himself
the lonely night and a bat 's black wings ....
since , richer for its chastening grown ,
came locked by the bend of the course ,
he is my brother : " then the night - black beards
upon the other side , where shepherd pan
but just at that moment a lady passed by ,
nial 's heart was filled with joy and pain :
high on a throne of royal state , which far
critics has seemed unintelliglble , rests upon the following :
above her robes that now were snowy white ,
her skull is wreathed artistically , and sways ,
but when lucilius brandishes his pen ,
( the song of nehemiah 's workmen )
and looking up bewhiskered out of the pit ,
wherefore art thou not dead , o sirion ?
such was the life great scipio once admired ,
beautiful , solemn , and slow .
the paladin returning to waylay ;
with besy herte to poursuie
perhaps you really wished to come ,
this magic bowl revives the soul ;
but _ satan _ read his _ visage - lines _ ,
a blotted sun and skies that fade
ther as he sih no lyht of day .
from navel downward , one and all of them . "
we 've had wi ' ane anither :
at his first coming ' twas not there ;
busyrane , ii . ; iii .
and in shape and size the fellow 's neck
in after days the master , in the glow
and all for me are the joys it is bringing .
" the spirit giveth life "
light has disappeared from northland ;
where warmer skies do smile ;
beneath a willow by the river stream ;
so brief , so passing beautiful -- o days ,
his presence warranted the hope that here
to him who longs unto his christ to go , ii . 222 .
and shape of sweetnes , be they such
and works of the same pottery , bad or good ,
next , proclamation through the camp was made
north , south and east and west--
watchin ' their lantern swingin ' to an ' fro ,
when angry most he seemed and most severe ,
from the old bridge we ey'd the pack , who came
nor could urge the wooden vessel
in view of present sufferings to be wise .
is something that doth live ,
with equal pace ; now follows he , and now
each one his dream that fashions me anew;--
" go to your mistress -- quick , " i said sternly ,
what are the ends of nature 's laws ;
pause on the footprints of heroic men ,
in winding lake and placid firth ,
and prayit for him with all hir hart
the moments of my life , its hopes and fears
and all the mount aghast , if venus wroth ,
' till she reached the age of eighty--
a god , if he defied him to the fight ,
as a bird thou canst not wander
it stood : four times with sound of arms the belly of it rung ;
none could astolpho have found any where
called never , never .
_ who _ chained this other giant in his heart
whom restless , winged feet for ever onward bear?"--
lest , seeing thee without , some servant strike
from nature as she lives around ;
in peace and loyalty ,
be observed that , according to caesar 's account , he
heigho , says rowley ;
for even bright - hair'd niobe her food
they’st hev no excurshuns for nout but their lip ,
nor blush to yield even reason 's arms ,
but sunward from the vivid many springs ,
lotus - land was possibly in western libya , but it is more
had trac'd most plainly .   who would deem , that scent
" fire whom jumala created
trusteth the delicate leaves , feebly beginning to shoot .
and no god laughs as i pass by ,
one morning , by the break of day ,
not in themselves , all their known virtue appears
idealized , or as the robbers of schiller .
the steed draws back in terror ,
--"is she a nawful , ugly , old
alas ! still faithful to his back
from palace high and crowded street :
says the pieman to simple simon ,
she starts at such mistakes in nature ,
till on that spot their swords the grave have made ,
as lang 's i dow . "
lead him only to the portals ,
a nymph of air or goddess sent
and leave him only the renown
the boy is now a man ,
from all the generations which succeed .
with reverent feet the earth he trod ,
that is here ,
swoon'd , murmuring of love , and pale with pain .
distance .
meantime , with infinite uproar the greeks
sea - faring men orewatcht , whose bark by chance
those cruel wings , and thou wilt stay .
about its boughs , but at its summit shagg'd :
where , through the cliffs , the eye , remote , surveyed
without some further proof , even to recount ,
driven from cities by his restless moods ,
by the hand , o , lead me still ,
« y no hay playa ,
sentenc'd upon thy crimes?"--"him death not yet , "
that 'll ride up on a truck--
the youngster 's artless heart o'erflows wi ' joy ,
i set as a sign      s and r together ,
this hour has been an hour !   another smile ?
while riding on the way ,
each idle gait to shun .
to here the foulys song .
and with iniquity is big and covered ;
to india , would show munificence
none could run so fast as he could ,
the exotics , and tramples the tender young shoots ,
how often then the stricken heart deplores no comfort left ,
for the vision , that was true , i wist ,
she had dreams all yesternight
in sight of one whose will should not be stay'd .
no more was kyng charlis , ne godfrey of bolown ;
that i this task should longer slight .
with such a fervent flame of human love ,
o'er cliff and ocean the white dawn appeareth
care - charmer sleep , son of the sable night ,
find the runaway ;
selected from our bravest youth , is gone .
sortem : dura negant cedere mollibus .
" let not the people be too swift to judge ,
never to meet again ;
yet more relenting , oft less true
he ceased : vidyujjihva obeyed ,
not for to hide it in a hedge ,
but wherefore should a man be benevolent and just ? the immediate
yet ne'er could lo'e them as we lo'e the auld aik - tree .
o i have brought in now
i mean a man he killed instead of me .
and the maidens in their prime ,
sweat steaming vapour ?
of which the coming hour is always the best .
her beautiful head ,
makes for niagara , without delay .
' i 'll come for your decision later . '
_ margery _ . my brother ! this is hell to me !
this blazoned , brilliant temperance hall
again his scatter'd people .   in that clime ,
the rivers , have been hers -- man to endow .
dear lady , a divining ear .
hoping so--
and a saddle nap is n't a rest .
oh ! let me snatch her sidelong kisses ,
arrayed in many a dun and purple streak ,
whether ( the gods succeeding our desires )
so spake the goddess ; and the prospect clear'd ,
as the songs of this enchanter ,
stuck py him in de sand ;
mary had a little lamb ,
like an unfathered vapour that enwraps ,
mindful of its griefs no more ,
earth , but the shambles of omnipotence !
when lion - heart came home from the crusade .
that thou hast a purpose joyful , a courage blameless ,
" this circuit , " said my teacher , " knots the scourge
loud uproar hence , and rage of arms arose ,
and i have neither sorrows nor fears ;
i mount the hurrying waves night hides from me
be this your prayer , o maidens fair !
and what thy stores contain , bring forth and poure
and make , as ten - times worthier to be thine
who keepeth even footing with the rest . "
and gloom and want oppressed him hard ;
heartsick for mary , though with passion masked .
you see how cream but naked is
then tripoli , gainst which is malta placed ,
the forum , where they minister'd the laws ,
o mother dear ! that thou wert here ! "
  this poem is found only in the 1795 edition . the journal of the
which she too early and too late hath spill'd . '
discarded in despair as unmanageable , at the cautious
but cold and trembling waxed his frozen heart ,
when i speak the wigwam trembles ,
of worthy parents , and as christians stood
agreed not to sell their verses for less than half a mark a
stood on the look - out , and with his spear held back trojan whom
for me in nights of madness drunken hands upheave
till he learns the distinction ' twixt singing and preaching ;
and those beloved features
and gie 's a hand o ' thine !
pierre de la brosse i say ; and here provide
that life i should learn to hate ,
" what to me is this noisy ride ?
even from the northern throne which thou shalt share ,
--"gray temples at twenty?"--yes ! white , if we please ;
for a million billion people .
oh , how i loved her !   fiercely glows
that she might enjoy the music .
there wold none the yatis deffend ,
be you not proud of that rich hair ,
but thinned it far too much to do them good !
that , wandering in a summer hour ,
the little songs that echoed through my soul .
beauty that we have won
going . he hung his bow over his shoulder , and as an overall he
o lord , i have been talking to the people ;
by flowing waters , under shady trees ,
that only care , for bliss , he home has brought ,
should i climb , or fear to fall ?
« otoño , » clama de su carro de oro ;
" let him throw over his classes in the cause of science , " said
with eyes that shut and real hair--
the rearmost fugitives ; they o'er the field
vain , very vain , my weary search to find
is best of all in hour of need .
your fearful shells , that burst so fast?--
the afflictive hand of wrathful jove to bear :
to gather from each rosy lip
brother , this my love impute
and i , the last -- well , here i wait
in the morning beam dances ,
of gaining everlasting bliss ,
that many christians have they falsely slain ,
he , with parthenius , were by rapo killed .
that gave each winding law and poyze ,
her hope and me . "
from many a mountain shrine ;
with unbought plenty heaped his board on high .
that hold these weapons ; and the eyes ,
and ocean was their grave :
these for the soul of siegfried , her dearest lord , she gave .
the one and the other , a sea;--
stant aries , which hot and drye
and making slow acquaintance with the day
to shipwreck and the corpse - encumbered sea .
while those high spirits of this champion good ,
warm slippers and hot - water can ,
some are pied with ev'ry hue ,
fritters itself away !
the postboy 's horse right glad to miss
yet ' tis not to adorn , and gild each part ;
alone he falls , with wide , wan , woeful eyes :
virgins as sufferers have wept to see
an awful wrath , should reason stir ;
a teapot , can , or otherwise a kettle .
when i hold the lamp of love in my heart its light falls on you
and growing up to godhead ; which for thee
last , the sight 's self , the sermon 's text ,
their restless souls are wrung with grief ,
where the firs are ever falling ,
aweary of its pasture rich ,
as sweethearts ' names , and whom they love the best ;
listened to its gentle pleading ,
in red - roofed hut , or white - walled home of kings ,
young babes he had , to fight which made him loth ,
and straightened out those glittering supple coils
the best of holy hermits hied .
past the capes and round the islands ,
at evening from the tall pagoda 's top;--
their benedictions down .
but enoch and two others . half the night ,
to other thoughts he bent his fierce desire ,
linquantur phrygii , catulle , campi
qua stella sulcum traxerat
the wild trees for my food , and run
" no , my tulip !   let us rather
( ' mongst things they leave the curtains up to show ) ,
and the color of both was quite scarlet to see .
if maidenhod be take aweie
and the miles are swift and sweet ,
having suffered so much in his day ,
oh , fled they not too fast , love !
the earth , that is sufficient ,
the last city in stony patience .
from forest ' ere it was reclaimed ,
and his sun shows victorious
what lips have uttered ?   then go , lay thy love
day is restless , night is quiet ,
from off our limbs a chain ;
my ends obtain'd
but arthur , on his kingly dais - seat ,
great wits to madness nearly are allied ,
by morrow evening , and from land to land
for t ' sake o ' all there 's in it ,
who were but born
anon he wole his hand doun lein
upon thy head as dew in summer night . "
in a land where nothing but self is leal ?
of earth or aught ? whene'er the sloping
by slow horses ; and unhailed
he left his stand ; they fired the gallant bark ;
had cradled thee instead ! )
prologizing of the hellenic goddess , by association of the " wise
on the verges of night and day .
carved its framework out of linden ,
for perjur'd sinon , whose enchanting story
thrice happy , o despoina , were the men who were alive
without stealing it , why the boy will steal .
if wit so much from ignorance undergo ,
reared its columned trunks in that remote and distant
( 1 ) sisters ! what have we heard !
devise .
' under the dock leaves , '                       _ frontispiece _
el insondable afán del infinito ,
where the pale lustre of the moony flood
to gain and to give ,
this makes thee blessed peace so light to hold ,
men 's leader :     king solomon ,
in a splendid barge , with golden prow ,
wait , and i 'll whip
to council ; for he will not long delay ,
her buskined virgins traced the dewy lawn .
of all steep hills and pinnacles , thrust up themselves for shows ,
draw the long table for a game of bowls .
but when he came again to me
at love 's arising , now thou stand'st to view
take care to shear them , and then defend them .
sought in manala a borer ,
as repose its still waters , so repose shall this breast ;
of sooty coal the empiric alchimist
and with greatest care conduct him
were quaker parlours with gilt pictures hung ?
beneath the sudden rain ,
rowing her selfe within a quiet bay ;
yet in thy dark streets shineth
make me thy lyre , ev'n as the forest is :
" see , how she sorrows for the newly dead !
and lead all the little stars
' we have fought such a fight for a day and a night
and shattered the star 's image .
right plainly , ponder , who he was , and what
and a shout went round the board ,
of apple - carts and motor - cars ,
of yesterday , so late hath past the lips
but ever shall i bless that day :   ( i do n't bless , as a rule ,
gude ale keeps the heart aboon !
that beats one response to the brain 's many questionings ,
with bands that are stouter than iron manifold ,
the youth who loved so well :
there 's nothing special of my own to show !
that the luring white flower of wonder
where our tall - topt marble and iron beauties range on opposite
i 'd fly him with a make - hawk . he 's in yarak
sing glorious hymnes and sweet tun'd roundelays ;
en i tas'e his juice ter - morrer , else i neber tas'e it mo ' .
is like the maker 's love ,
have not yet look'd their _ last_!--else , ' mid the roar
all the land was full of people ,
praeciosissimas res quascunque optaret ex universo regno sveciae
quo fouet teneras diana nymphas ;
ah ! an untold world of sorrow
blows of little airy war - clubs ,
wheeled thro ' altitudes of blue
of wordes he was eloquent ;
his rib was made a wife .
we two poor souls who loved so well .
and fell in thilke time also ,
the cock for his sheen ;
to pasture where the gentians blow ,
and blaze eternal round the wondering pole .
" well , if you do n't know that , " he said ,
though ne'er instructed by a cat ,
or ere some thousand years have passed ? and that
and blessed ye , in silly pastors ' sight ,
whilst wonder is keeping her vigils with me .
wordsworth , _ fragments and specimens of early latin _ , pp . 567 and
but paris , while they talked , gave up the ghost
see me now his faithful minion ,
gives somewhere back the thoughts by england given ;
of biting adamant , to take firm hold
that taught a thought i ought to use ,
idler upon town .
and all the rounded skies
then while o - kis - ko looked on in wonderment he saw
as any land may be ,
my creed to shun the theologic fray ;
close lock’d above , their heads and arms are mix’d :
had sixty seconds help to gimme .
to break her faith and be to thee untrue ,
thy solace is found .
a taper in a rushing wind .
and charged them neuer so to meet againe ,
he knows the harm ; and therefore wonder not
that doth unfold it , and this during still
could so much beauty condescend
before the gale in an ice boat
all advanced the harp to gaze on ,
let fly the fatal bullet
limns on the silver rim of joy
and this was the reason that long ago ,
' at 's berreed ow'r t'heead an ' t'eears ,
found many a feast and many a city .
" wake christ , wake christ!"--who , having tried the tank
in some still land of lilacs and the rose .
march , o sun , and wheat , o wander ,
and seide he scholde hire wel conforte ,
gambols and dances ;
i favor'd none -- nay , was almost uncivil ?
their radiant wings are folded , and their eyes are bended low ,
their sighs incensed ; sighs foreign to the will !
so little cause for carollings
" what , and art thou too witless as the rest ?
egomet me coquo et macero et defatigo .
out , women!--to the fire ! "
even though i fall the achaeans will give me my due rites of
and i choose -- just a throne .
hath chas'd thee with swift foot ; now stand we both
juremos por ella vencer ó morir . serenos ,
but that _ montrose _ and _ crawford 's _ royal band
two dark - brown eyes looked into mine
the moving finger writes ; and , having writ ,
to every atom in the universal plan .
to sit upon my orchard - seat !
round is the neck , and full and large the breast ;
eyes of a smoldering fire , heart of a lion at bay ,
pours on the weary limb
most contemptible of heroes ,
of black forgetfulness ! while in thy gaze
but lausus dead his weeping folk were bearing on his shield ;
of trojans fronted with broad shields , enclosed
in . on earth this day !
heavenly hurt it gives us ;
" i say , whose house is that there here ? "
to his dear shelter'd home.--
inside was all of lead , of such a weight
all of suomi saw and wondered .
we still may find , dear heart , the sun 's bequest ,
like sea - born tribes who eat their brood .
for we are , etc .
hardly had turpin fallen on the earth ,
if fate bade choose some sweet unrest ,
o'er mountains known but to the eagle 's gaze ;
simple and quiet and the wherefore know not ;
" haste breeds delay , " and recollect
where _ shall _ i begin with the endless delights
" the music will go up to heaven ,
there ! little girl , do n't cry !
and makes it a sorrow to be . '
thy inner self , thy outer self ,
i know that i am thine ,
who coming o'er against me , by degrees
all the craft of the wabenos ,
ours is the one true lovers ' knot ;
my course runs below the soundings of plummets .
i puke , i nauseate -- yet he thrusts in more :
and the utmost of your knowledge ? "
unmoved in attitude and limb ,
' cross a hill - brow -- what 's beyond ?
i was an innkeeper , who loved to bouse
nor my sister 's cheeks be moistened ,
yet , think not , youth,—o think not ill
when ev'ry breeze was the soft breath of love ,
to show her pious zeal ?   they went astray ,
and night descends upon the desolate plain .
from pirates sent out by command of the king
to help us to its contents .
would have revealed it to your woman at the next
a fearful shape , i wandered through
from the shut stable to the frozen stream
but only , children , hear it right ,
the useful , not the great ;
and yet how soon the throbbing breast
then flitting into darkness !   so within me
nor yet moved she her look from its fixed attention after than
sought safety in promiscuous flight ;
the light is leaping shoreward from the west .
the tongueless dooms which dog the travelling suns ;
' but , alas ! the dream is leaded
for every one , did say begum ,
though nature bid rejoice , yet sorrow tunes my voice ,
a dust whom england bore , shaped , made aware ,
take , nurse , the little book you hold !
that follow'd that movement .
draw a magic circle round them ,
the mosque should have his empty arms ; this said ,
but roused by the voice of the midnight chime ,
of tall trees crashing to the ground ,
the pale faint - scented bitter neem ,
in pain , and toil , and weariness ,
that alle tho that hi avoth ,
' twas not the cobbler 's scolding
malprime upon a steed of purest white
at morn the countess louis heard
into a gentle - licking flame ,
if not , my heart will break with sighs repressed
low earth , by only weepers trod .
his impetus with greater fury smote ,
the spring is past , and yet it is not sprung ;
let me not grudge a few short years
let not my life be worn out to tatters by penury of waste .
of late , eternal condor years
and ilka bird sang o ' its love ;
bright as is a diamond ,
on cytherea 's day ,
if that a ' bonne fortune ' be really ' bonne . '
the sable bands combined ,
in the women 's good graces seek first to be seated ;
by the people .
flammarion and kelvin and herschel every one ,
one on his youth and pliant limbs relies ;
smarted with wrong , he prayed , " god pardon
think of strollings ' neath the pines ,
pure -- as her young example taught :
calling out at the top of his voice :
by force impossible , by leave obtain'd
those honourable scars which brought him fame ;
and aid the tyrant ’s overthrow . ”
we still shall bless the bounteous hand
and never home came she .
vix implet cochleam peracta messis
born from the hero of the diamond sword ,
intensity of thought and feeling , the clearness and minuteness of
something more high perplexing in thy face ! "
his arms have a perpetual holiday ,
the forming dew is globing on the grasses ,
canoes throughout the trying race
call my thoughts false and my fancies quaint
and--"ho , " he laugh'd , " for me the sweet one fears ,
louder than dreams that assail and doubts that palter ,
that thy folds are soft and fair ,
that can not reach the south .
the one true god confessing ;
hear i the creaking gate unclose ?
with a malicious and infatuous brightness ,
after the flowers and other tender grasses
the host of heaven sings .
are the maids there who give you the cup ;
what speed they make , with their grave so nigh ;
in many another heart
i should not to despair give way
burst out of these stiff wire webs
--_with quickened hearts
" this must be charlemagne ! " and as before
a fallen state soon had he to redeem .
if we go anywhere we 'll go together to meet what happens ,
both praise and bless his name ! then kiss the rod :
yet she neither spoke nor moved .
for these apollo left in all men 's lands ;
" this said , he led me over holts and hags ,
the futile purpose or the settled plan :
for you , if you repent not , shall atone
deprive the rainbow of one single color ,
of circe 's palace bosom'd in the grove .
speaks solemnly ; and i behold
like a dog 's at night .
with wine and song to cheer them ?
a quiver flickered the pop - corn strings ,
for me in kindred gore are red ;
the royal head is sever'd ,
whiche doth theyr hertes to synne right sore inflame
must be compelld by signes and judgements dire ;
to guard their navies , and defend the wall .
and white , glaring water spurts up
for bale or else for bliss ! "
is it by streamlet or limpid fountain ?
through brakes and through briars ,
and sheltered from the noontide sun
it told me more than many rifled graves ;
the stranger , slave , or savage ; their decay
and yet , my heart is light , inside ,
in her presence : i went round ,
he wields the roaring hurricane
god smites , yet loves the lion .
he ended ; they astonish'd at his tone
show man was made to mourn .
do my lessons now .
spraying my warm face ;
the hebrew prophets from the second death . "
of bitterns , and fish - eating stoats ,
it 's that or naethin ' .
light the pine - chip in the holder ,
the message , that i bring you , it shall be freely told . "
and beat their fetters into swords ,
their spirits watched my ecstasy
come , little boy , and rock asleep ;
that tossed the dog
he said , and falsely sware , yet him assured .
read o're thy self ; peruse each line , each look .
arrests my foot!--dread doom of human crimes ,
which loves the virtuous , and reveres the great ,
i heard a great voice from the temple saying
the swollen rivulet sobs with secret pain ,
tainted all with breath of evil .
all round about our feet shall shine
translucent drop o'erflows the cup of joy ,
a haughty port ; for in her heart , humane
so many tongues that _ sipa _ deftly say :
so mine still stay in dreams .
with whom each field 's a paradise ,
to draw the doctor from his retirement into the street . we
groans with the anvils and the strokes they bear ,
“ perfection : ( fatal thus too much to please ! )
for thither all his strength the prince had brought ,
then grows my heart to other hearts more tender ;
on wood .
in her full lap the champac 's leaves of gold ,
i do possess what none can take away
a - preachin ' sermuns to us of the barns they growed to fill ;
verani , omnibus e meis amicis
tell me , how may i know him , how adore ,
struck at that thought , as new awaked , i lift
in order , one by one ;
receiv'd , the wing'd aëllo scares them far .
and she purr'd when she thought of her kitten at home .
as fortune was just like the rest of her sex;--
be plagu'd and blooded for the yellow fever ! "
forty flags with their crimson bars ,
and the renowned ferrau , who cried aloud :
right down by her side , and the old spinning - wheel !
  " one , gauzoo , was steward of the ship -- one of the most brutal of
of the oppressor , at whose feet the slave
those fierce delights once more .
are windows to my breast , where - through the sun
_ dainty _ , pleasant , good - humored , agreeable , rare .
and i suppose the race will live and suffer
she showed each flower the one and only way
the ages hold me high to endless shame ;
but for the maker , mr . mann , of london .
and the well - tattooed taheia clings panting to your knees . "
and play i ' the plighted clouds . i was awe - strook ,
of mummied silence laugh
many a green gown has been given ;
by the death of the brave , by the god in the skies .
_ pr . _ then let him do it ; all is expected by me .
an ' sometimes on my forehead
ah ! once again thy harp , thy voice once more ,
my old friend .
this one lily i found and made haste to bring hither . "
wilt _ thou _ be a teacher of mercy to _ god _ ?
“ as _ gotes _ out of _ guttars _ in golanand , ( glomand ? ) wedors ,
and when the clouds like folded sheep
what is all else to us ? only that we enjoy each other and exhaust
you have strolled from the bar and the purlieus of fleet ,
the first string charity ,
the picture or the marble bust
when o'er the streams of ocean dawn drove up
and as i rode by dalton - hall
to pagan rites .   five centuries and more ,
astonish'd there , his former friend to find ,
all of gold , and flowers , and sweets ,
and worthy of acceptation . fire is bright ,
stores of provisions everywhere are seen .
goddess excellently bright .
i 'll paint a ship with any man aboard . "
from wells where truth in secret lay
i view the leopard slope , the bristling crest ,
if roland wronged sir gan in aught ,
of all that goes to make the element
cambric for her wimple , o , the finest in the land . "
if she retires before a stronger foe ;
no fetch he saw , no shape , no child :
the scale to measure others ' wants by thine ,
and thus thei leften as for routhe
six snorting steeds postilioned roll a stage
of change ; and how should this be otherwise ?
she . tell me what you said to her .
himself .
outlawed , but not alone , for love
a treason to the abiding throne
the flattened tree - toads so resemble bark ,
on one ; the hair upon the other died .
in sighs at morn , and dreams at night ,
where blake and mighty nelson fell
plates of bone upon his forehead ,
which sings the sires from whom his lineage grew .
on humble life whate'er its state ,
a sin that wraps itself in purest guise ,
" and i conjure thee , demon elf ,
soon then through the dusky branches
thy lip invites another kiss ,
than one of you shalle be dead or taken .
peeping underneath the sofa !
they have an air of knowing all is vain,--
at fidei sit demptus amor ; non illa dolebit ,
bought by the profits of unholy greed ,
a hopeful joy upon the day to come ,
in fancy let me wing thee .
yet deeds unjust as theirs the blessed gods
in a bird 's nest rocked on high ;
knowing their foes , once grappled , must be doomed ;
o i have heard the thunder of drums
be shown the gloomy vale , thereto induc'd
was wooden , too .
and she be glorious , but ourselves be free ,
when i am south again ;
your fair skin with warm water and with ointments . the danaans
courtesy . none the less they must avouch
quoniam nec venae perpetiuntur
when at home alone i sit
other two coursus wyaesaes i haue ,                  f. 96a .
but , elsewhere , far outmeasured , far outshone ?
and thousands had sunk on the ground , overpower'd ,
with woman 's face and angel 's stature , thou
cold , frozen hearts have felt the melting flame
and he looked at lucile without speaking a word .
suffice of my forefathers : who they were ,
and bid them hasten , as life was at stake !
each little woman bent her head ,
hideousness on hoof and horn
perform thy vows to me with grateful care .
and she took the bath - whisks with her ,
tasted amiss to thy soul .
all her flowers .
come dancing from the sea .
and he shakes his feeble head ,
some spot that 's sacred to her past .
shield - fighter sturdy , for sleeping yearned .
and winds have rent thy sheltering bowers ,
black gowns of each denomination ,
jerusalem , peerless in grandeur and woe !
i was san zeno 's abbot at verona ,
naufragium hoc alio immergere naufragio :
sacred to mars . bright shone his crested head ;
and , with the courage of a faith restored ,
thus as he mused , the better course appear'd ,
the weird boughs toss'd from some prophetic tree .
of a great church , and toward its face
of denmark 's juel who can defy
but turn me to the valiant paladine ,
and he believed it , chapman , he believed it !
seized the white fat of the roebuck ,
how touching , when , at midnight , sweep
from joy , between the queen of beauty 's breasts
hung dreadfully from hill to hill .
ah , why elsewhere for this , need signs be sought ?
before a committee of the privy council , of which mr . walpole was
descried us , savage cerberus , he op'd
oft have you pray'd me , when in youth ,
tugs with might and main to turn it ;
from the muskoday , the meadow ,
scaring the foes yet more , by ares ' will .
to give their places in the ground
forthwith opened they the gate ,
there 's holy saints
with one , two , three ; one , two , three ; one , two , three -- kick ;
as it 's give ' me to percieve ,
" you have cowardly beasts with you , " said the latter , in a low ,
a royal robe he wore with graceful pride ,
to any one who kicked me--
her supremest requiem sing ;
give place to swords and plumes , the pride of war .
literally :
calling to mind their wretchednesse
a flame half ready to fly out sometimes
a blast of fiery desert wind that dried ,
as sche which wolde ben awaked ,
i love the rites of england 's church ;
till ' round the rink i smoothly glide .
the muse ( _ unnoticed in the background _ )
are met in thee to - night .
" requiescant ! "   claude 's grave tone
thus for to moche or for to lite
hear ye news to - day
you tackle any scholar
to the movnt , ase i gan sayne ,
and botch the shattered plates again . "
then out it spake her white lilly ,
and abiect thrall , in fleshes fraile attyre ,
each the symbol of his household ;
a thing to marvel at , in splendour glowing ,
though he fought for his cousin -- that 's me , " says she ,
you place yourselves in the sea - street ;
fremebunda ex alto , ingenti sonitu et spiritu :
a solemn prayer , conceived in agony ,
where men keep never date nor day ,
answer that the world may see ,
for , the name of wildenstein is
he weareth lotus - bloom , and sweet heartsease ,
the way , the way ! let us not die ! "
ah ! ill - exchanged for all that mirth bestows .
thy form , thy stature , and thy air divine .
and the dark traitors shall strive to surround ye ;
i 'd thwack you well to cure your pride , my woman of three cows !
and then , ah then , the heart of heaven was hushed ,
' e 's a daisy , ' e 's a duck , ' e 's a lamb !
where it doth seem disparted !   ere the dawn
only the blossoms of sleep and of pleasure were mixed in my hair .
chickabee , chickabaw . " and he said nothing more ,
fear forsake thee ; god will take thee
" they were -- i think ' twas told me--
blow , west - wind , by the lonely mound ,
.     .     .     .     .
die ganze nacht .
ecce autem aedificat : columnam mento suffigit suo .
on ! " i said,--"read on !   read all of it ! "
still , he came again the very next day ,
then cold , and hot , and moist , and dry ,
gleamed from bursting sheaths of verdure .
pleasant to see great works in their seminal state , pregnant with
it fills with alabaster wool
an ' ettlin ' for to snore .
he starves;--they sit at meat
produced . "
or haply , moved by envy of the king ,
of the winding pathway in the park ,
compared to that was next her chin
of demigods , gandharvas , ghosts ,
~i have ridden the wind ,
our stores are love - shafts fair
these in the flame with ceaseless groans deplore
rich harvest of failure you 'll reap ;
off with hats , down with knees , shout your vivas like mad !
as free from care for you and me ;
while we 're in our prime ,
forth from the chapel of the king ,
his men drew round ,
thou goest to we d the orge 's tide .
my heart of thoughts that made it ache ,
a vessel full of wounded men rocks in the moonlight !
be sometime not a living spring of tears ?
above all shocks of the hour .
see honour smitten on the cheek and gyves
this charge on sítá , hear and aid . ”
to perish rather , swallowd up and lost
sche wolde walke upon a dai ,
it were hard from the sweet maid who bears it to flee ;
that never margrave any / to them more well disposed were .
the eyes desert the naked skull ,
which never sinks nor dips below the wave ,
may its sparkle be shed o'er the wanderer 's dream ;
but i , being young and foolish , with her would not agree .
i see a child before an empty house ,
untired , untamed , and worse than wild ;
so to the elders as they sat , there came ,
through the night !
a hungry hawk , pounced on a sparrow - cock ;
you by known streams and sacred fountains laid
or paper turn'd to money by the bank :
o mountains of my boyhood , i come again to you ,
they dived and swam from morn till night .
vitch mofe crate coleridge squalm :
which has many times kept me out of the ditch .
" three casks , from somebody else 's stores ,
but i loves , i loves ,
an emperor of germany to the throne .
' twas a hard change , an evil time was come ;
they hired him , though to hear him you 'd believe
where flowers with the dew commune ,
that i , without thy denying ,
" dearest sister kriemhild , we must wear costly weed ,
thus suddenly a voice exclaim'd : whereat
to pardon one , that now doth cease to be ?
where the black bear is searching for roots or honey , where the
mesnard , capt . brig _ active _ , i. xxxi
our mineral resources and water - power are unused . a collection of
tyrants , tremble , charlie 's here !
for my orestes is not yet a shade .
here lie the arrows of the foe .
can your america contain them all ? "
gathers the blossoms of her fourth bright year ;
white and golden in the sun ,
silent and snug :
so much absorbed he did not notice me .
northland 's well - intentioned hostess ,
when i think on the happy days
the helm , to launch forth in a little boat ,
knew her dead .
scared and startled dunlap 's posse ,
eager fishermen stand waiting
the shorn and searing fields stretch from me one by one
when they return and bring their progenies
i will climb
when it approaches its five - hundredth year ;
with a mop and a pail of water ;
and sir lark stopped singing , quite vexed and cowed ;
the basis , on which love of glory builds .
a majesty like his that has no name .
of jove 's awaken'd wrath ; deep thunders roar ,
for you all love the screw - guns . . .
that hits a man . it 's simply this -- does he believe in me ?
francis gonzaga and frederick his son :
who first must make the scottish prince my care .
  in these chapters of the _ biographia literaria _ , coleridge was
no angry hands shall rise to brush thy wings .
that small , for flax ; and if one wheel had rest
to me the meanest flower that blows can give
o , were i thou that she might take me in ,
cock treads his hen , but treads her underfoot .
when the blewart bears a pearl ,
one morn , as the maid from her casement reclin'd ,
thou dost outrun with thy cascade
for ther was poeple ynouh in londe :
to the country of the dead ;
hadst not been driven forth ; for in my mind
and simple jenny sadly missed him ;
two at bowness , in paris none ,
if thus of peace he broke or loosed the knot ?
and also suche bosters and crakers comonly
ha ! i hear the strain erratic
while priests can sing and read .
and rising by the moon of passion swayed .
so plain that all men sure must know it ,
mock me in the nightly breeze .
cast , the first bullet leaves the mold,--the lead
so pleasingly combining .
but like a shadow , proves the substance true :
no eggs for breakfast till the bill is paid :
but be ye close ; purchase your stores in haste ;
all the treasures of this convoy
she , that had heard the noise of it before ,
for i permit you evermore
of mist and of frost is its .
strikes somewhere near the object of his aim .
his head , it is true , may have had a small shock :
of that foul deed , at once his smithy sought ,
hope 's rose - hued flag . there was no need to speak .
  how cimabue found giotto , the shepherd - boy , sketching a ram of
yet this was the meaning of all -- this the end !
be craved again with tears,--
he only hears
of troy , to win which we have suffered so much hardship ? hold
witouten asking help of sun ;
fuscus , old scout , if a guy 's on the level
a bitter sweet , a pleasant sour ,
plain living and high thinking are no more :
and gete a sone , which schal winne
if it is what you wanted , then how much
them with outrageous and unseemly language , which made ulysses
for those ideals for which , since homer sang ,
wakening unwonted echoes , wildly rings ,
_ quakin _ , quaking .
so bad , too , you 'd swear that the god of both arts ,
cam forto preien ulixes
celia , out of doors a star ,
along the hills of galilee the white flocks sleeping lay ,
seen broad - browed sages pass with sandaled feet
if þ{o}u hatȝ oþer lygy{n}geȝ stoute ,
by hands unseen are struck aerial wires ,
and she much love , much faith to him did bear ,
tossed with stormes of fortune variable .
she was a prodigal flower that never shut
beyond th ' horizon ; then from pole to pole
for that no marble tomb about him stands
but , tho ' they blossom , leave me to my dreams .
as golden venus , mounted on the height
or do you see a sail ? "
as others have done often in their lives .
usurped the sceptre of castile ,
i can not blame thee , for my love thou usest ;
" you 're right in that ; by jove it is . "
and a great throng crying cypris ,
" but yet , indeed , not all -- oh ! no , by perun !
the little farmer ,
expect no peace till haughty britain yields ,
of the sad flock pac'd onward .   by the hair
the yards are scatter'd o'er the deep ,
hopeless to see the birds back ere life wane ,
and through a field they ran ;
hollowed by age , beyond his reach--
and watched your services along the wards
cheer up ! bear not about a world of grief ,
a soldier 's couch , a soldier 's fare . "
stands -- and before thou canst be going home
which of finest flax was fashioned ,
appear'd fair freedom 's genius good .
his holy rule of action heard ;
then was extinguished , and sir everard made
the liberated captives shout applause
kindled with an angel 's art ;
i must alsò part of your woe
my body is weakened with terrible toil.--
and on the thought my words broke forth ,
with never breeze to kiss their heads ,
he faints : the soul unwilling wings her way ,
the speculation about her and her sister ,
to thy good faith commend i this dearest lord of mine .
dauntless opposers of tyrannic sway ,
witħ oute cause hurte me and wounde
i speak the truth .   so long as i had gold ,
nor slake thy heart 's thirst even with the cup
restless once more to rove
how many barons here were slain ,
kingee in a talkee loom
i have the honour to be ,
abuse one another whenever they speak ? "
and under all things her advice was true .
to see thy memory blessing all below ,
where hope and love , a pallid twain ,
are insufficient for such a knot , it is no wonder , so hard has it
the seas all cross'd , weather'd the capes , the voyage done ,
now dreamers in cloudland turrets ,
_ eve . _                    i am renewed .
begin with me , my flute , the sweet mænalian strain .
_ king _ . what a life !
and vanished ere long o'er the distant horizon .
o'er an humble patriot 's grave ,
but vivifies the soul .
she comes not forth to - day .
" but i let it not distress me ,
may we lift a deep - sea chantey such as seamen use at sea ? "
" that can rip off the flesh from your bones ,
money on the stage , and though they want humour , have abundance
that turn'd so slow and sad to you ,
with those delicious hours which thou
put the gray steed in the harness ,
on he pressed with quickened pace .
against a greasy wall ,
pass dat cider an ' ' simmon beer .
and to be forever there .
would that in safety from the parthian war
and echoes gathered from a world of years ,
when owles are strip'd of their disguise ,
just estimation prized above all price ,
is , by the dripping of perpetual rain ,
the love we may not own ; go , seek for both
when they had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a
free of the curious yellow press ,
and the wind slackened and the glimmering east
steals o'er me at thy sight .
consign'd and chariot to inferior care .
i shall beat about her heart a few brief years,--
if you should float above the battle 's front ,
“ now from a beast 's to human frame it goes ,
now all the western clime irradiate chang'd
nor surely could he elsewhere so gladly tarriance make
looked up , and rising slowly from me , stood
and the pledge of my songs that were then to be ,
until i saw the chimneys rise ,
with massive caldrons of dodona 's mould ;
their petals of pale red .
of strong majestic trees , now come to such ,
but snapp'd his falchion ; him peneleus smote
ch .                   we have seen his sorrows , lady ...
till one remarked , " oh ! deary me , where is the river gone ?
and no one looking round the wood
in battle or siege you 've shown . "
now use your strength and nimble hands ; ye need
a sunny wreath for poets meet ,
but we may find some blue " at home "
mourn for the mighty dead ,
savona was my birth - place , and i sprang
a gentleman , or old or young !
hope for all around us ,
alone , unnoticed , and unwept ;
and their gold and their empires -- where are they ?
emancipator servientis plasmatis
are the prettiest things that can be in the world .
this merry christmas day .
likenesses of ourselves in recording angel 's gallery .
summoning up each argument to aid ;
her face was dim and blurred ;
for company ?   you know that when a woman
are one with each new summer come to flower ,
with footsteps measured and controlled ,
all your care of the cost ,
' twas the great day of mourning for rollant .
and used me like a child .
with travertine .   he who came after me
a curate might have played with me .
my heart is beating with all things that are ,
leaving the singing stars their ceaseless round
that pleasure he esteemeth .
the fire of love that lights the pyre of death .
diana 's shrine alone no off'rings deck'd ,
looks ever vacant , ever facile smiles !
features akin to hesiod ; well , homer is hesiod and many more .
with subtle saw and promised meed ,
how 's my boy -- my boy ?
hands , and drew it down over his head , and hid his comely
shouts in their silky ears
the dense blue smoke arose .   nor heat nor cold
witness their homage when they come and strew
o ye i love , who hold this loveliness
e'en to the very dust are bowed .
and though it tires
still we arrived at length upon the point
cleon sees no charm in nature ,
o'ercasts the world with mourning , under foot
or tug and sweat and strain ;
tarried in priam 's city , sore afraid
and the great czar hearing our story told ,
sweating and blindly burdened ; who 's to know
had voted _ them _ a beauteous race ,
there is a gentle nymph not far from hence ,
lone wandering , but not lost .
in thilke time hou peles
broke all about his land ,
qua solatus es allocutione ?
whose smiles for ever fade so soon ,
broke massed in mist ! broke massed in mist !
i caste , and sih my colour fade ,
" vain are thy fears ( the queen of heaven replies ,
when the _ suates _ { 55 } shall conduct thee hither ,
ah , if the proud oppressor fell ,
for finishing my plan ,
on the freaks of his favour'd child ,
is new and neat and adequately tall .
a shower of summer meteors there;--
to act or not , necessitie and chance
as mortal ever saw ;
up with a leap like a horse that 's spurred ,
erictho , sorceress , who compell'd the shades
by some dim witch : ' a city walled with gold ,
the love which the writer had sought to conceal .
should see bright - charioted aurora more .
in such a wise as ye nou wite ,
and cast the ponderous burden at the door .
to his respected friend .
flow'rs of all hues smile all the year , arranged
worldward on each magnificent return
and there was foot - rot in the flock
take charge of all that is here . yet first look to thyself
is not -- art thou high or low ?
which fancy only can see thro ' !
my love has here , in grateful veneration
then up and spake the laird 's ain jock ,
then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn
hast heard it ; for no common woes , alas !
and unfamiliar charm of face ;
" o roland ! thou , my dearest boy ,
o'er coldness and disdain ;
pointed and polished and pink and clean ,
since now from woodland mist ,
these wait their doom , from that great law
freckles over her face were spread ,
for his , and for our use .
that hors and man down~ he bore ,
but simultaneous with her fall
& porchace þy perle maskelles . ”
cleo . i 'll set a bourne how far to be beloved .
never any day that passes
giant dragons whom no remorse storms ,
" to both , my poor child , but ' twill bring with it too
the fool shall mount an arab steed
mantling her lovely cheeks . then , ev'ry knee
the daily spite of this unmannerly town ,
getting rusted , warped and battered ,
i feel thy wondrous power to save
but smoak - jacks , and rumfords , and other new hits
and greedy pikes which use therein to feed ,
  _ which ne'er deserted me _ : there seems no reason for supposing ,
wait not the might
without him , and alone , should thus assay ,
but vitting donned a feather robe ,
i would revive it in my heart ,
seaward round the world !
he is a fole that crauynge is alway
eight callow infants fill’d the mossy nest ;
here , in the fumes of a feculent moat ,
to hear your bells , o beautiful princeton towers ,
you heard us ? ' and melissa , ' o pardon me
" that e'er my captain fought on foot ,
but once or twice o'er the dark green tide he saw with a solemn
she shews too much to raise desire ;
of the interminable sisters ,
sponge not full .
its evil thoughts -- i watch the wings ,
sudden consequence with it , one morning was placed
bright as a poppy , strong and free .
nor played a simple part among the base ,
nunc caesim variat , modulisque canora minutis .
i du believe in bein ' this
and lips that are two skinny rags :
that the best charms of life they ne'er could know ,
so streamed the vision through his sunken eye ,
that gave her foemen 's dearest bluid
again he winds his bugle - horn ,
a ' rethmetic sum that would n't gee ,
of thorn , the fairest of women .
intent his wasted spirits to renew ;
the mole and toad and newt and viper ;
so watȝ serued fele syþe þe sale alle aboute ,
" goodbye , tom , " whispered the venus annodomini .
and out of stricken helmets sprang the fire .
y - heried be thy might and thy goodnesse !
ah , that you ca n't guess unless you know her sad story .
the cotton - bale , the stevedore 's hook , the saw and buck of the
shall but link us , heart and heart ,
they walked the narrow path of right
so all my jolly comrades say :
a foe by birth to troy 's unhappy name :
which the exhalations of the water and of the earth ( which follow
chosen young lovers in their husbands ' stead .
her harts desire with most contentment please .
and safe to harbour bring us all .
leaps on the shivering sea
and sell them for old .
the christian people then god 's placid front
or make her garland fade .
' just one little pang ,
she waited -- as for some reply ;
aloft is roosted for the night ,
_ is the eleventh avatar ! _
and listen , till i do beget
widen the prospect and it ne'er is right ,
who down below in volumes twelve is shining ;
dispensata manent mundo dominumque sequuntur .
who claimed before me , sponsorship from god ;
continue still your hospitable way ,
when colin 's at the door ?
( answer prepaid ) .
whose dog art thou ?
if lucretia at tarquin but once had looked so ,
and i think this young man is lucky to be free .
and at parting i gave my dear harry
thy foeman in the coming fray . ”
sin doth never cease .
from the church came a murmur of folk at their prayers ,
child - birth purgatory , canto xx . 21 .
alas ! thou art gone , as are the hours of day ;
" you may lay me in my bed , mother -- my head is throbbing sore ;
his anger kindle , presently
holding the dagger in his blasted hand .
the humanness of other men ;
i have , no doubt , instill'd into thy mind ,
and kindle up my flames anew ?
  nil intentatum nostri liquere poetae ,
against adversity!--merely to lie , at last ,
rule therefore thou the chariot , and myself
or wilt thou straightway come to me ?
spaces of superb parade ,
et carolo et mariae tertius est oculus .
a land where all things always seemed the same !
showed the blank moon 's mute medusa face
is safest yellow .
he , through the key - hole , maketh glad ;
you it was who sat
where is my son ? and why is he not with thee ? "
gaed past their viewing ,
when fortune fled her spoiled and favourite child ,
were diving and swimming ,
and yet my parks and palaces:--
where we can rest , in dream elysian ,
lilies in far waters green ,
fled his legions to hear
thus beatrice ; and i , who to her counsels
so i 'll punish you , henry , next time ,
the gutter offspring of a race obscure ;
vittoria ! speak !   what is it ?   answer me!--
procuryth with all , enuy , peryll , fere and payne
in king herod 's hall ;
who groaned to see their shrines expire
in excellence and beauty , in its scope
seven men from out of hell .   ai n't the owners gay ,
beyond his ready reach he passes into night ;
saying , rejoice thou humble grass , thou new - born lily flower .
like deepest mire below :
enmeshed in heaven 's beatitude .
many sheaf - binders followed , and the work
and when eyes meet far off , our sense is such ,
the hapless youth , whom thy vain gleams decoy !
stood up with the boys -- leaned -- patted each head
so while we gazed on them
lo soul , the retrospect brought forward ,
boldly she spoke--"soldiers , attend !
' ladies , if not pluck'd , we die . '
the flexile osiers , and the basket join .
but soon i learned to wet one eye —
though he is not seen by day .
around the mansion in a circle shone
and sightless warriors clutch the leaves
even to tears .   but tell me , if thou know'st ,
i will strip the life from the bulb
naught 's to be had for money ; we need ( or else we 're sped ) ,
the despot 's heel is on thy shore ,
a motion and a spirit , that impels
e'en as a dog , that yelling bays for food
again will bloom in the harvest - home ,
myriads of spirits serve him !
to man 's great sympathy .
he did not turn his course or quail ,
hire wynges for hire armes tuo
' t were better at replying ! "
" _ pearls are not whiter than his teeth . _ " and then
" shug - chug ! shug - chug ! shug - chug ! " that is what the locomotive is
“ thee wounded ; vindicating from that crime
came up into his eyes , and reigned a queen .
' fo'e de robber run .
this is a rare instance of the use of the long septenary in
" my own three favourite cities , " answered juno , " are argos ,
discrete as thou , or whom i more have lov'd ,
your look?--that pays a thousand pains .
thou formest each for life 's enjoyments ,
hindering their present fall by this dividing ;
gaily they come , as though the drum
of giving you something ,
the infant elements received a law
and helped themselves to " cherries ripe "
our harvest - fields with snow .
they lowered it down to be re - cast .
all gaze , and all admire , and raise a shouting sound :
precious stone ; and therefore in abulfeda it is joined with
to turn the tasteful viand o'er the flame ;
_ seven lusters _ , five and thirty years .
of usurpation , proud ambition 's sacrifice !
babies .   in connection with this last let us very
( ' twas no mere dream ; their very looks i knew ,
that is theirs wherever you go .
sweet , the kisses of death set on thy lips , colder are
tempests and storms in life 's whole progress rise ,
for counsel and redress , he sues to you
i dreamed a dream , now fain to tell--
the mossy pales the orchard spray
i will turn thy grief to joyance ,
each breathing sweetness like a bridal bower .
that from your roots was torn away ;
come in -- come in
the haughty spaniard calls his own ,
who does not wholly give himself to art ,
is n't age but just a place
the air is faint with flowers ,
we seek our ramparts , and desert the day .
y el que niegue su pecho á la esperanza ,
the moon it shines fu ' clearly .
stretched on the ground , beautiful - crowned
with a border of grasses ;
and yet , perhaps , if states with states we scan ,
practised alike to turn , to stop , to chase ,
the maker from whose hands it came
but to the evensong ;
for tho ' his locks be lyart grey ,
beyond sun - smitten salamis ,
but ay the best was mine ;
and run in fright to mother ,
wastin ' time on " blackberry " !
an april day ;
outstripping , deep in his posterior flesh
fount of the people 's misery did prove ? " ]
( a sort of mermaidens ) , evaded the clashing rocks , which
and profanes the cell of the holy man ,
is fate indeed so strong , man 's strength indeed so poor ?
ah ! nevermore ! for all the child might crave !
like the winds the sledge flew onward ,
he treads along through time 's old wilderness
" you are too candid , " cried the candid man .
six months , she now the seventh saw at hand ,
was a merry old soul ,
they two bold children shotten together ,
but through the night with torch in hand
i remain . "
i knew not if the earth with me did grieve ,
by science enlightened , a friend to mankind ,
the air supports me -- from the earth i soar ,
then , the music -- so softly its cadences die ,
country . it is done in this way . an old man , or someone else well
the wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep .
with your diatribes eternally before me ,
( to shine in darkness only being made ) ,
to a skylark
with fillets , and with vervain strow the ground :
thy nameless , secret , hopeless longing sweet ,
it is our home -- our throne of pride--
" but not on us ! " the oysters cried ,
' there must now be no passages of love
here was square keep , there turret high ,
wishes o'erjoyed with humble things ,
scarce on the open plain embattled stands ,
and cried , " och , the pig has got out of the door !
full - cestused , and suggestive of what loves
that swiper grand , r. oliphant ;
let us alone . what pleasure can we have
fanny fletcher is forgetful ,
a vague , a dizzy , a tumultuous joy .
au milieu cependant de ces peines cruelles
they got to bed with speed : young grey to dream
but they have been and gone and lost ,
unfeeling hearts possess these isles ,
are free as the breath of their mountain wind .
" day after day , day after day ,
but it all sounded as if they only said " quack - quack ! "
and tears take sunshine from thine eyes !
coelum machina praeferat ,
  the serra de cintra , situated about 15 miles n.w . of
of blasted hope , of wither'd joy ;
or watch at midnight with how many eyes
e'en with the loud hosanna ringing in his ears .
too late , inflict the punishment delaid ;
feasting in the dim , volunteer farms of the forest .
so fair the lilies ' banks ,
so , father and son , the herschels , with their charts
exhale this vapour vow ; in thee it is :
and poverty ; who still must rend the veil
make me rich in a trice ,
so far as i know but a tree and truth .
contemplating , i fail to pierce the cause . "
and my fellows see me curbing the fierce steeds , the dear dew-
and fades awa ' like morning dew .
colin , worshipping some frail ,
to whom thus helen , loveliest of her sex ,
on a fiend - like wind it curled along
ai nt nothin' to us but biz .
nor light , nor warmth , the rooms discover--
what mockery when he is all aflame
sings my _ maire bhan astor _ .
he used to stroke it , did my pretty son ,
or must such minds be nourished in the wild ,
was curdled with the chippeway cry
but the scarlet glimpse of myngs on turk ,
but hark!--in yonder broad and sunlit meadow
denote thy suitors . i who have appear'd
when first we drew these patriot swords ,
of mighty ruler and great conqueror
of midas , who amidst the crowd approach'd .
i wish we could die as the birds die ,
this heart within me burns .
silently he stole upon him
and not die .
or lay me down ' neath chestnut boughs ,
i rule , but not oppress ;
of various persons , each to know his part ;
we think we 've all heard quite enough of this your sad
how unto karl shall we tidings send ? "
to call old england " home " ;
such close was to the circling melody :
thou then , april , iris ' daughter .
mole de encima .
edward , lacking in resource ,
pipes to vespers from his perch ,
than the apple trees in blossom
oh ! fail not , my brothers , to meet me in heaven .
" behold , since first the corn was green
against well - ordered host in arms arraid :
when hymen , pensive and sedate ,
called to his seeds without a sound .
to our hurrying feet ,
now give thy hand ; for to the farther shore
of a purse full of clipp'd , light , sweated half joes ;
the wounds of destiny 's relentless rage .
with never a drowning boy to save ,
on high his brandished war - axe wield ,
moveless in ecstasy , a sudden light
the third awaited ; to the fourth he gave
but yet the freshness and the dew - fed beam
dost weep for me ? then should i be content .
he pleased the ladies round him,--with manners soft and bland ;
the hapless child , thine only hope and heir ,
ingratitude attends this train to vice .
but he , by some device of his ,
whose swimming eyes thy loving words shall bless ,
to say so were treason :
to pallas and apollo , such were now
that , when fogs are thick on the harbor reef ,
the wild notes and the faint notes meet--
their holy guides fair knowledge teach :
here have men found the spot where that high band
and it was learned a love - sick girl
enamoured consecrates to never - dying fame .
sabrina rises , attended by water - nymphs , and sings .
and when his _ fiat lux _ the death - knell tolled ,
at last thou comest ;
and in what coyne or language to repay .
a jack - o'-lantern , a fairy fire ,
" my land forsaken , and my love betray'd ?
forgotten.--pope .
was common during the native american campaign ,
glorious men , with heads of eagles ,
as if in play ; and she stood beautiful ,
which here enamels everything ,
the fairy to her word was true ,
while , oh ! so near in the gloomy night
that went before , or was postponed ;
i know you proud to bear your name ,
if more admired than she--
th'eternall makers maiestie wee viewe ,
and here 's to them , that , like oursel ,
would have paid for the sins of ten !
and blushing blossoms own her sway .
around man like a winter covering ,
and sipped the cool delicious wave
the caesars . in italy , the works of mediaeval art seem to be of
far - called our navies melt away--
weaves moony mists , and on whose hair ,
a most prodigious appetite : the steam
the brightest link in the chain of time ,
" as ye would they should do to you , do ye to them . "
the dying crimson of the west ,
so sweetly whispers to my soul ,
god keep her , she stood in the door .
but what it carries with it to the dark
when burns implored him not to fuss ,
gleamed for a moment bright between
mellow and slow .
free ! with a blemished fame .
it behoves us now to voice aloud :
gods ! what may masters dare , when such a pitch
= wordsworth 's shorter poems.= edited by edward fulton .
for the thoughts of young mothers who watch their babes sleep .
but she is mendin ' things . "   ' e starts to larf .
was ended , luke ( for so the son was named )
whose tender winning arts
a vision back , since each thing comes to pass
stood many northland sons with swords in hand ,
passed out of it ; the characters have dwindled from their heroic
’ tis truth and sooth what i say to thee ;
that land is very far away ,
a hush is on the mountain side--
i 'll wait for yer agen the gate .
by losing thee a while , the whole race lost .
sche leet no morsel from hire lippës falle ,
the testament of stateliest worth
do i mourn my mother 's relic ,
the story of thy wondrous fate
i set her on my pacing steed ,
this wintry cold is slaying me , seeing that i have no
faint as the summit of a sultry cloud ,
and sudden chill . their feet foam - hid ,
" o wretched ones ! " she said , " o ye whom armed achæan hand
the blessings which our father deems
( how immature , narcissa 's marble tells ! )
and when the sun went down , outside
my harness piece by piece thou hast hewn from me ,
or blade ward off , and now by leaps eschew .
and kissing barefit carlins .
this old slow music will have never done
he was the bridegroom , she the bride--
ne'er shook a tow'r , so reeling to its base ,
when he left alma mater , he practised his wits
but very diff'rent was their speed , i wot :
wherof arist the worldes fame ,
drawn by fleet horses nobly bred .
the sun had set , and it was growing dark ;
direct us , how we soonest may arrive ,
beneath whose awful hand we hold
the lances of our foes .
i see them not -- yet know him well
and thus we weep .
hoc ataui monuere mei proauique nerones
with fly - driven fear a wretched
and hippoplacus ’ wide extended shade :)
in this new symmetry you have no part ,
or saucily appear before their betters
the provost of st . george 's will remit
of retribution fiercely works in me . ' "
but open be our fight , and bold each blow ;
" so that a man a man may be ,
and dowsed my face , and drank at spring ,
for she is coming soon ; "
still ' mid the ruins -- girded with the rays :
what they had seen they never told ,
they 'll say i was doited , they 'll say i was fu ' ;
woe , if in hours like these , o more than woe ,
down in the field :
the pewit hollos " chewrit " as she flies
could help him at strife :   too strong was his hand ,
was it a dream we dreamed ,
my champion , too , has fought and bled--
( _ shall we not , ah , shall we not , wander there again ? _ )
with feather on feather ,
how through this passage to the truth i ford ,
and kiss his pale limbs in their cold sea - caves .
i was prepared to answer , but delayed ,
distress'd , i shall be patient yet a year .
and by his prudent life and deeds of worth
the act were justified to - day . "
and saw the altar cold and bare .
when death , in hideous and ghastly starkness ,
a solitary eye
feet , giving thanks to god because once more , as it was come to
and now lyrnessian acmon huge with strain of limbs strives hard ,
and yet i dare to dye ;
down through the sand , its bottom and each bank
his body ? who flung galen from his seat ,
to gie them music was his charge ;
_ of kittiwakes that fly _
the neist we never saw ! "
some messengers to know where they had been ,
babies with bare knees plump and round
explore and know . and then , as all before ,
my masterful lover whispered to me ,
whether we laugh or grieve
to laugh , were want of goodness and of grace ,
not thy contempt , but anguish and regret
but a little cloud appears ,
from nature 's various dispensary ,
brood the green children of parturient spring!--
he can not rest until a spirit - dawn
by the beer are much embittered ;
when we consider that the steadfast hold
from marking them , or ere her words began ,
i journeyed joyless thro ' a blossom - fire
the wandering cry of a sea - mew in freedom
" yes , " answered josserande ; " and would to heaven my sylvestre had
called him " daddy,"--begged he 'd disclose
poised on the outspread wings of happiness ?
though several thousand people chose to try ,
but there comes to birth no common spawn
strong as the strongest , too , he was :
is not unfit , i deem , for the fire - side ,
certainties suitable to me ,
a world of beauty dissolved in bliss .
an ' drops ' is bundle in the lap o ' night .
siculus says that the lot fell on him to be of the number . his
whereon i am to lie till i must ask
room to deny ourselves ; a road
who anxious stood with strength untried !
though the way it be lang ,
rebuckled the cheek - strap , chained slacker the bit ,
led by pathways known to thee .
dark - prowed ship she sent a favouring wind that filled the
help ! fire ! help ! hell is burning !
brighter , holier than the day ;
nought was enough , until with steel in hand
great god ( quoth he ) withdraw not now thy ayde :
so let it break .
was velvet in the youth of good queen bess ,
siue minus ( certeque canent minus ) , omne uouemus
then shall i gloat on his commotion ,
ah me ! what a strange , what a gladsome duet
we all were silent . ah , obdurate earth !
it hath no flatterers -- vanity can give
as a necessary result of a system of natural philosophy based on
the ' evil must be another 's , which is lov'd .
then tuoni would be with thee ,
of animal and plant to virgin shores ,
flung it from the mountain of urvina ,
the ripe eares swim , when winds doe blow .
there is no way , with honor , to stand back--
dawn came at last . no need to wail or cry ,
' t is done , the horned crescent falls
the man in me sleeping begins to awaken ;
may be , as you -- so leave him with his fire :
for those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow
the golden immortalities
" and sigh not , old man , such a doleful ' heighho , '
pounds , yet as he had none to prosecute his claim , to shelter him
worse plagues to issue from the stygian mire--
thy hidden majesty ,
it is very still .
the day would be a very festival ,
ieiuniorum dum litamus victimam .
“ how splendid to live in this wonderful land ! ”
with draughts of stormy joy .
if i had as much money as i could tell ,
loud burst the thunders of the arms of fire ,
i am digging my warm heart
some one intent on mischief , or inspir'd
quotation . ]
_ o ' weenty - teenty kid _
we that smiled , contented , strong ,
here in the palace , he may be prepared
to quicken with his vitall notes accord
the feast of adar ?
el pintoresco ropaje ,
this journal cribbing from the dutch
out of her throne by giddie vulgar might .
of thy sage counsel made , for some good end ,
alas , that thine aid should have ever betray'd
the ilyats of khorassan ; and behind ,
full three years three hundred workmen labour’d .
and traveled with them where she learned the life
the daring escalade ,
thine own transgressions no one can amend for thee .
sprinkled the ground,--the ground with verdure smil'd ;
the great ones of the town .
o'er his head he drew his felt - cap ,
then were my task completed .   now , alas !
that musing meditation most affects
you shall never hear more of me . ’
you 'll learn , that in their own right sphere
and round this earthly tomb let roses rise ,
and every day
on all the immortal artist had design’d .
in the houses of death and of birth .
" undazzled it can track yon starry sphere ,
it once had seemed a little thing ,
the milkmaid left her milking , and fell down
and built its vault ....
now feels affliction 's keenest dart ,
and jack was paid and put the cash
but angels , as we speak ,
with the wail of his living mind .
" why take the style of those heroic times ?
best treated as half - lines , with inner rime ( _ versos
and clay for precious stone .
reach not its utmost depth . "   like to the lark ,
mrs . mulligatawny fell out of the world one day .
nearer than we have ever been before ,
one dying with great things unfinished hath ,
as the branch of a green osier , when a child would overcome it ,
one since hath quench'd the other ; and the sword
that me he receive this very eve
heard their voices calling to him ,
little , dancing , white - fire creature ,
must needs wax cold , if wanting bread and wine .
my curtains drawn and all is snug ;
righteousness . and i , perses , would tell of true things .
their scars that lengthen out the lines
hast thou come forth at twilight 's silent hour ?
i am jealous of the looks men turn on you
pene preces satyrus , pene puer lachrymas .
or nodding gardens pendent in mid - air !
from wintry vents .
o stricken heart ,
for he will come ! he shall , he must come !
which , when i see , i tremble and adore .
of whom his sword bereft us .
i rund by leaps an ' boun 's .
and begins .
wide waves the morn her golden wing ;
between the midnight and the dawn
to the terminus , euston square . '
then forth from the chamber in anger he fled ,
niversity we 've got in town--
of the march of the travelling sheep ;
and bless'd her sleeping with a silent prayer ;
where greed is an ape and pride is an ass ,
that you are not beloved , as you deem'd that you were :
sez this is his view o ' the thing to a t.
" not one word , dying , would he wish to blot ! "
the little city , ithaca ,
" without crutches , mademoiselle emilie ! "
of that fair city where the soul is strong ,
one said :   ' on earth my place was high and great ; '
into the earth ? into the sea ?
a music sweeter than their own .
and his stubborn wrath allaying ,
from the selfsame bough as at last year 's prime ,
before me sat they down , so burning bright ,
of such as , wand'ring near her secret bow'r ,
revives -- reblooms , but under happier stars !
estimation the line that admits them , were in the time of cowley
the isles rejoice together , in a day are nations
there he espoused the daughter of the king
distinguished them as candlesticks , and in the voices of the
and one more has joined the unnumbered
and the road before me .
autumn across the frontier
farewell , o little darlings !
by vice untainted ; who , from early youth ,
the grief is fixed too deeply
the forests are in flower      and fair are the hamlets ;
from her great breasts .
there are white domes somewhere
' twas pure affection caus'd her tears ,
for that sweet odour which doth in it live .
in gaining all that useful sort of knowledge
while i carol away idle sorrow ,
into the water .
i 've asked every animal here in the barn - yard ,
and the place that has known thee , shall know thee no more ;
the evening river is level and motionless--
the joie which was thilke tyde
the smiling rosy little head ,
much wondred i to see so faire a wall :
but for the truce , for burial of the dead ,
and may refiner 's fire go through
her second act displays a livelier scene --
said , diving violently for my hand and wringing it .
thou hast lost thy strength for ever !
proclaim _ poetry _ to be frivolous , and useless .
alive ' mid ashes of the ancient fires ,
of gray hornet artisans!--
no less than in the lusts of kings :
steadily nigh .
is one for less complacent execration
long sitting will broadcloth abrade ,
" this is the spur that makes our coursers run ;
and journey on together .
now lying numb , unknown , and uncaressed
and laughter , and music , and , among the flowers ,
war , war , war against babylon !
when he with purifying steams , himself ,
represented in the geographical system of the time by the ganges ,
is coveted of angels , and doth make
the last sad supper of the master bore
ever to holy meditation vowed ,
o can ye labour lea , & c.
a mouldering soldier lies -- your countryman .
if we are to believe that lao - tzu
to raise the creeping rills from humble beds
animal life began beneath the sea .
beyond the acrid , spongy wet ;
after battle keen to feed was he :
and then the lights of home!--
canto liv . the battle .
in zaragoza , naked to the gales
and fetch a stoup of that rare wine
that nobody sees its face--
since yesternight ; and with him all the gods .
while annie still was mistress ; but at times
sailed in the warm and yellow afternoon ,
his promise made , to be his guardian still !
listen , meditate , improve--
grew up like organ , that begins anew
but she tweedled and sung what was next to be done ,
a pathway for sylphids to throng ;
and calm their faces shall burn out
to welcome him to this his new abode ,
y mientras la blanca aurora
" goddess , " answered achilles , " however angry a man may be , he
than the persian weaves ,
en mi alma no dejara
" god save the tsar ! "
bright as the sun , the sky he seeks ,
and on the greeks inflicted all thy plagues ;
the strength of soul that builds up as with hands
in the mystical dim of the temple ,
and regarding your profession with a lordly unconcern !
and then the hospitable sire
shoulder - blade with a footstool . "
well now , and while the summer stays ,
" send the cows among the bushes ,
and equal charlemagne heard either side ,
he , nearest on my right hand , brother was ,
de yam will grow , de cotton blow ,
of listening night . and haply now she sleeps ;
too good an english seaman to desert
when the flames burnt his book , to drinking he took ,
facing three ways ,
ca n't you school us in the graces
that lies ' twixt thee and yon dead man there ,
quien á dios tiene ,
surprised by dogs without its dam !
" praise and thanks for an honest man!--
" for i am stout and fearless . "   up the rock
one - stress iambic
must feign , and secret snares for him extend .
i ' the wooing shelter of an apple - tree ,
norat apollineam , versumque imponere versu
let not disaster daunt thee , nor reproach ,
while life is sweet and tragic
the wreath was formed ; the maiden raised
in the middle of the ocean ,
then in amaze she went back to her chamber , for she laid up
the painted seasons in their pageantry ,
he silently sighs while the past recounting .
omitted by me in consequence of its length . its universal
' twas after dread pultowa 's day ,
lightning of war in midst thereof contained ,
nought but the space of dayes three ! '
and who would stay at home ,
whom heaven adorns , superior to thy kind ,
fed , and that eminence of glory reach'd
her vision , till it seems indeed
which he , presenting , did the sum demand
the napoleon , the nicholas , with its half million
" these tales you tell are one and all
to mingle such exquisite dyes ,
full many a goodly place i know ,
into my soul?--i can not bid
removed , had shared his fame , the lokrian ,
well , why do n't you speak ? _ phor . _ [ _ aside _ ] . by george ! i 'm in a
still out of reach , yet never out of view ;
strongly he threw in the clutch ; but rahéro resisted the strain ,
the choking chaff the clattering fanner reels ;
burglars to rob the house laid wait .
' true ! most true , ' said puck . ' no common man 's work , that . and ,
a red bright thread . it reaches him . he reels .
any rose which zephyrs fan .
but some day far in the future ,
have you not terms and definitions given
though such blood - drops should fall from me
they are laid in the heavenly singer 's breast ,
not though you die to - night , o sweet , and wail ,
we feed the kindling flame of art ,
or liker judas fallen to reprobance ;
but never the fluted pipes shall go
for any other than myself ; and thou
those around me , those above me ,
--for what ?   do you feel thankful , ay or no ,
“ he , but he knows too well that less esteem
you shall have the bow bell rung at your will ! "
he 'd say , " mend this and t'other line and this . "
but me the hot and hungry days devour ,
and there 's nothing you can find
observations are such as might be supplied by a hasty view , and
heedin ' , paying attention to .
ah ! his voice , as i feared , has the secret betrayed ;
y ' sh'd hear billy bird 's squeals:--
far off a gloomy mountain rose alone :
von meinen vorgängern abweiche , einfach vor augen legen .
to tell once more , the adverse muse permitting ,
_ and round the ring came dodo , the brown mare ,
without the vent of words ; which these he breathed .
but hope , returning to dispel her fears ,
why did the morning dawn to break
then some poetic brain is fired ,
most dreadful -- shrink not--'tis the last !
he thought on her , that was so hend ,
the heretic 's tragedy .
than where the serried treetops meet
here of such pride the forfeiture is paid .
arrived at the banks o ' sweet tay 's flowin ' river ,
in form as living maids , but wrought in gold ;
that heydays fade and go ,
peace is concealed within your hand .
my early childhood loved to hear ;
mauve cloudlets--
a parson himself might have sworn round the compass ,
of ancient deeds of valor , on fields of wave and sward ;
changed into a quail , than ever ,
thus on its sounding anvil shaped
the slams is the place faw a popula show ;
reward prepare .
the vánar hosts each land explored .
tell the slow moments of the solemn night
little lamb , who made thee ?
no fairy field of fiction , all on flower ,
and through the whole wide forest rang
not forgetting their tea and their toast , though , the while . ]
a day shall mar , a day shall cure for her , but what for thee ?
because so drives me onward the long theme ,
the light to which ye flash the desert out ,
till a _ magpie _ , at length , the banquet announcing ,
thy pinions ' flight toward far scamander 's bank !
the starry host , by gloomy silence led ,
pheres , clymene ?   ye can save your son ,
like a pic - nic it seemed ,
from the mountains to the main !
o god of truth , whose living word , 81 .
at funeral feasts some mourners deal
chiefs crowded to the embattled plain ,
then came black - robed , grave and aged ,
aye , aye , baby - bye ,
child of eternity 's unclouded clime ,
of baffled seas , let in all fair delights
its pathway , which the wisest fail to spell ;
the greecians ; but when ( three whole years elaps'd )
and its garb evanescent each tall tree receives .
my sire 's , i know not if ye e'er have heard .
that fill my heart to weeping .
reins their tail and their head , and were knotted up in front .
and hear the pattering footsteps of the shower ,
as with a rural mound , the champain head
sum vera lux : videre me nemo cupit .
employ ,
up a steep hill . but when upon the crest
death with a sovereignty that heeds but hides , bodes but abides ;
' for if a drunkard fights , they ca n't do less to him--
sacrifice , and vinous libations , poured from goblets crowned with
all be ye never so jealous , nor so wroth .
there were farm houses enough
portugal , alphonso the sixth of , a monster , 453 .
said the aged väinämöinen ,
no more reply than from a breaking string ,
as large as is his native worth , his wealthy arts shall spread ;
who changed her form into the bird that most delights in singing .
barnyard at that same time , when she was six and i was ten . "
glad to be offer'd , he attends the will
with all their freight of love and pain :
que bernardo está vivo y tú agraviado . »
armed as ye see , to tilt against the knights
he is my lord .
in time you shall see fate approach you
" where through battle 's rout and reel ,
calls the watchman of the night ?
thou thyself , earth - mother , in mountain and
the fox went off while the hounds made halt ,
" alas ! " the voice returned , " ' t is thou art blind ,
but we are " on the war - path " now ,
halcyon thing!--
" oh daddy , we 've been happy , you and i ! "
and drew the oaken settle nigher ,
a thing of much less import in that clime--
passing one by one out of life , left me till i was alone
where one towards her flew ,
of praises to the never - wint'ring sun ,
feathers blowing ... the scooter 's found .
the contributions of a rude aboriginal of america shall appear to
else should my being by this time have shown
abortive , to torment me ere thir being ,
right o'er the hollow bark saturnian jove
the judges lie , and mark'd you how each one ,
upon the shore of life .   i see
and bloody hand that beckons on to fate:-
enough of woes already have i known ;
to be sure i 'm a turtle , and you are a belle ,
neud am ddraig urddawl didawl i m dyd .
or proud imperial purple .
those who read the same edition
but for a moment only
the day - god sank with glory dead ,
des dieux souteneurs qui se giflent !
our mother was busy making a pie ,
( oh , follow , death , i pray thee , with the fall ! )
how sweet to think that he whose love
in his lap of horns a hundred ,
her majesty , who liked to gaze on youth
and how to cloath aright your wanton wit ,
attacked as he was by a universal outcry , and that outcry , as it
and i build my song of high pure notes ,
under that sycamore stands the old cabin ;
_ writ in the skies above me _
on the burnt grass their crumpled leaves and red ;
man , once a captive , all respect should claim
the only thyrsus e'er i 'll ask !
help the cause of all the races ,
such sweet compulsion doth in music lie ,
albeit you never ask it :
comes reason armed to clear or bank the flood !
the stream flew this way , that way ,
canto xxvi . eighth circle : eighth pit fraudulent counselors.--
yea , it forgives me all my sins ,
coming down , it finds curs more snarling , than their power
your expectations to the pitch of pain ,
a magic that awakens and goes by ,
self - murder , stung with fire of thought ,
when , self - transform'd by its own magic rod ,
that was sae fair and free , o. "
utawas ' tide ! this trembling moon
but england 's lion leaping from its lair
then straightened from his hoe , and hummed ,
against our strength no other man 's can stand . "
the lodging is well worthy of the guest .
fights in love 's name :
it happens often that her feeble cries
then blame not the bard , if in pleasure 's soft dream ,
to leave a ' my friends and countrie ;
he , the columbus of a vast emprise ,
shun the fierce storms among the sheltering rocks ;
thee , o father , lord of heaven and earth , because thou hast hid
he won me with his words . i said to her ,
of gold above her bony hands :
the other gives the extra turn to every bolt that 's there ;
here wily jesuits simple quakers meet ,
not more ; the anger of the archer - god
o come , and my sad brother cheer
who car'st for nought ! those sunk in grief , and these
comes our gentle queen to claim her
will tell thee pity thou hast none .
ponder these two examples set you here :
and one black bird circles above the void .
beyond the smoke of asian capes ,
i only know its use will cause
flattering words to her that day
in sea - coals , crashing as they part
then ulysses answered , " madam , wife of ulysses , since you
they err who count it glorious to subdue
robert , your brother , king of sicily !
draining the oaken pail
my love hath kist in tying ;
bearing prophecy
for to devour it he but thinks and struggles ,
free the fettered engine ,
tell him he rises now too late
to tell him her mind :
to look upon the sky
the plan is laid ; and , if his bag of gold
of insects in the windrows of the hay ,
blasts of hammer and steel and iron ,
with endless fame ; but from olympus ' height
( throwing himself on the ground )
i could clem(2 ) wi ' my barns an ' my wife ;
the pride o ' her heart was beguiled ,
present , or past , as saints and patriarchs us'd .
put his mane and tail in order ,
upon the capes and chines .
until at last , worn out by thought of these ,
care - free , unarmed -- the creature fled from me .
yet dwells the strain enshrined in the memory
are farthest spread , these woful tidings flew .
of some slain vision , is a weight to bear ,
she there shall dress a sweeter sod
and jill came tumbling after . _
then said my lady : ' thou art passion of love ,
as when large floods of radiance from above
thither came , when i was young , happy children trooping ;
and stamp'd on the floor with his feet !
cross of iron , that to mock us
i may no lenger hem~ hide .
with her and all her race . a love - sick wooer
was formed , so soon the clear light filled the air ;
' sayeth , he will wait patient to the last
that such a course may injure much her mind ;
where 's _ troy _ , and where 's the _ may - pole _ in the _ strand _ ?
' ah no , ' quoth she ,
the state groaned unanimously .
thou gleam'dst to joshua 's pausing sun and moon ,
the dames that walk in silk !
now , youths , with hot desire
or under the shade of cathedral domes ?
her fygure fyn , quen i had fonte ,
with our life 's clear and magic ray .
for the journey is done and the summit attained ,
in sweet embraces — ah ! no longer thine !
that governs all above ,
my best amelia , fresh - born from a kiss ,
enemies .
in your time ,
from cardinal caraffa 's hate , who hurls
our dear hermann kneel with his bride at the altar before you ,
like a bird losing its way i am caught .
in the mossy orchard ; the golden bees
the female wit is always quick ,
and art was a people 's shrine ?
with the sunshine in its kernels .
spake at last the ancient minstrel :
and striped convolvulus :
and so was every other sense astound ,
be fell ingratitude ; if doomed to smart
i have grazed in the race the goals ,
and pumpkins gold-- ?
his anchor is cast , and his canvas is furl'd ;
that ever hung on hades ' brink .
one of those who can do public service as a seer , a healer of
and all thy tender care displayed ;
nameless here for evermore .
wouldst after all he hath beheld , preserve
fair , firmly built , and walled with wood ,
was after the first counsel that christ gave .
they are plotting and planning together
nor feel deserted afterwards,--for this
and there , at night , in frost and snow ,
below , the bridge -- a noonday fear
that lays not up for his _ own houshold _ first ;
by those who ought to guard it betrayed , oh yes , betrayed,--
and not less bright .
and make the strokes he bears his choice . "
away -- never to come again .
in war , he mounts the warrior 's steed ;
of her -- my wife's -- first kiss on a summer night
the north is hid from sun and star ,
the exile 's hopeless lot must dree :
flutter and spread their tails .
in the mud my chin pushed downward ,
barefaced were received throughout england . deaths , which the
i will venture all these winnings ,
our last -- go , false to heaven and me !
never a flower swung sweet to my face ,
scattered the councils of the feathery brood ;
when to the garden of untroubled thought
say , my deserter whom ye well may know
but thou shalt surely find the way ;
looked upon them through the branches ,
fell the blackness of his crime .
the mourning son of raghu spoke .
yea , and is death now any more an ill ,
the stinging arrow , from the clotted blood
sprang forward , like an arrow from the string .
and stop at a withered rose bush
that alone is worth living .   i need you to - day ,
he made for arles , where yet he hoped would ride
when , in the crimson cloud of even ,
and though , in marriage , quite to kiss
to wake perhaps an angel blest ,
and let the north wind to her ruin haste ,
by romane victors which it wonne of yore ;
and , as the sabine women did of old ,
if that do mean , as men interpret it .
one careless turns the leaves of some new volume ;
then he smiled and said : " to - morrow
for kisses that i did not get
" the world is god 's , not thine ; let him
and my young babie will be born ,
thus shackled by the body 's spell
her beauty farther than the falcon spies ;
when lo ! even as luke relates , that christ
that fane rose only in perturbed thought ;
what the last dawn of reckoning shall read
i am remembred that i haue often sene
is that the sheen of golden hair ?
and oh , i strove so hard to save
love them : haste on , till thou to others seem
_ chrysolite _ , the topaz .
" you vulgar creature ! " cried the red ,
and listens .
' that 's your light way ; but i would make it death
maybe it was but yesterday ,
to leap beside him o'er the gleaming ground ;
of old buttermilk , and peckerwoods were beating
( shadows over a cradle ...
or both ? or neither?--a pretext -- a word ?
equal to the former:--
  butler , the author of hudibras .
of our own selves god makes a glass , wherein
for he was crucified .
hints of a pre - lethean life , of men ,
ev'n with a patient cheer thereof-- '
why he went mad -- i say -- but others not .
and declares the vanity of human judgment .
and o'er the syrtes ' broken billows row'd .
as lovely and as full of light ,
" little haly ! " sighs the clover , " little haly ! " moans the bee ;
he thought of the cane - brake , green and dank ,
that counter - works each folly and caprice ;
barefoot , trudging at his side ,
" for when she prays aloud for you ,
dwivid and mainda are their names .
whistling gayly to the squirrels ,
o , hallowed name , the theme of future years ,
in service , as some end it up in drink ,
along this ladder , down whose hallow'd steps
but here is a joke of cosmic size :
the darte is sharpe , who euer is in the chayne
liked him little . he thought much of his health ,
to dash his standard down , and through the plains
of night from heaven for to rend her .
my friend ,
our peace - branch from above !
around him threw . the hero toil - inured
be more sternly meted out , with grim horror , when i
with the poor fruit , after their piteous kind .
and men did rosy garlands wear ?
before god 's throne , and shall not be afraid .
" that all the world , " said i , " should have been turn'd
our weightiest counsels often mar .
tyl sodeynly witħyn the pantere
in the candlelight .
is far beyond the wave ; we will no longer roam . "
but ' tis the strong desire , for your dear sake ,
my soldiers , hast'ning from the upland wood ,
and see the foaming torrent rave
physicians came and shook their heads and sighed ;
which they beheld , the moons resplendent globe
by indra or by brahmá ’s hand —
wholly resolved to reach the farther side .
his dewy rosary on the eglantine . "
plenish thy pantry !
and on each moss - wove border damp ,
and on the height she will be won ;
you followed , through the quest of life ,
may happily shun temptation ,
and all stream forward to salem !
nor ask against my fortune 's grim pursuing
hertford 's broad lands , and courtney 's vaunted race ;
what is water ,
the hunter 's daughter near me ,
fair susan still stands - there , untouch'd by the wave ;
“ to dwell , i learn'd the art to rule the track
slow and painful was the progress .
saturno padre de los siglos de oro ,
and at the far end of the pathway
but i 'll big a bow'r on yon bonie banks ,
the smitten brass ; for resolute they fought ,
he is the children 's christmas ;
had in remembrance always with delight !
the cunnin ' for to ' ide ' is ' eart .
if it pleased the whim of zeus in an idle
a cock , a hen , a mastiff , and a cow :
as he enjoin'd . soon as the trojans saw
come , and trip it , as you go ,
but he beholds the light , and whence it flows ,
sweet affliction ,
yon hindu maid , whose heart true passion sways ,
and some of these so active were
nothing could please him , high or low .
will fulfill for them the evil day before their marriage . '
sertaque odoratae myrtea ferte comae .
if you repent not he will bring you low !
to mount upon his steed again .
so ran clorinda , so her foes pursued ,
the waters brighter smile ;
' a stranger come to see the happiest man--
i did not know the ample bread ,
in every wind that creeps ,
now i return my thanks with heart and lips
my dream of home life .
within the leaves a slumbering bee !
the great apology , which yet remains
such were the men of that braue age , quoth he ,
in troth a very handsome felley ,
th ' applause of listening senates to command ,
and charm to landscape doth bestow ;
there full in your presence
my face is black , but it glares with a scorn
through worlds i shall traverse , not a few,--
how great such a change , and how solemn the day ,
the patron , thus , indulged his grief ;
of that resplendent day ,
and save thyself and all of us ;
and make all his quondam associates stare
and ciphered up the roman scalps .
but halt not overlong ;
the rainbow outlives not ; their yellow and blue
withheld him better resolutionâ
and don the motley and hide the gown ,
dead , my honored tribe of heroes ;
at each wind 's hollo -
and showest all thy worth ,
or from their deed i rightlier may divine ,
call couey - ouey and ask if she has finished .
for this we knowen everichon ,
safely bound with reindeer sinews ;
& neu{er } oneȝ hono{ur } ȝet neu{er } þe les .
the plume dropp’d nodding to the plain below ,
--she shall be yet who is more than all these were ,
many there are who desire to do
for grief the wise woods ' peace ,
" and thee , thee , thee , o'er all the rest !
full - face with shame , and weeps and turns away .
then to the spicy nut - brown ale ,
chilling and killing my annabel lee .
and a bluer sort of sky .
with large and sinewy hands ;
again he warms the weapon , reeking still
the unbalanced lights like meteors play ;
right inter brotherly kindness ,
i am thy pastime . let me be to thee
" _ fair , most fair ,
and watch you spin , in your velvet gown ?
one 's chamber wall : yet saw he nought
its back was buff , and its sides were blue ,
meriones o'ertook , and thrust his lance
with glass at eye , and catalogue in hand ,
_ souch _ , the sighing of the wind , the breathing of a tune .
to alle his men he yaf an heste ,
till thou shalt find thy queen - handmaiden ,
so long beyond their sight .
for his lordeschyp so large , & his lyf ryche ;
who ere to men they bent the knee
his crown and sword were staked on the magic stroke ;
" tell what thou list ; but as thou escape from hence
the friends of my childhood , that dear faithful band ,
and longings one can not smother ,
said , " emma read her book , and did not live in sin . "
o open the door i pray ,
quid si non esset facilis tibi copia ? nunc tu
rubis vivants sous le soleil ! ...
they cried--"la belle dame sans merci
then why not i in mine ?
in act how bitter did he seem , with wings
( they heard 'em plain beyond wall hills . )
but softer spake the seer : “ abide ,
tao is the changeful world 's environment ;
for you , the _ doyen _ of our corps of dogs .
and thoughts with nothing to conceal ;
from eyes of many another / began likewise the tears to flow .
sweet , sweet matilda pottengen !
and tell me why is silent in this wheel
sprang into being , and fancy , untrammelled ,
i ' th ' midst . "   this said , in silence he remain'd
" grow up in beauty , as thou dost begin ,
i can tell balsam trees
as much as she hath mine .
and these and poetry are one .
a tom thumb family ; there
" brave schill ! by death delivered , take thy flight "
with hideous hieroglyphs and grim ,
the king is stern , but clad in brave array :
and boys who in lone wheatfields scare the rooks
may he , who will , his recollections rake ,
his glory to augment .   the bold design
prophetic , heeds its holy harmony ;
nor tree , nor fruit -- only a fragrant flower ,
ever singing full of fear ,
and for to know one thing of her did seech ,
when our prospects seem quite hopeless,--
in ripples to my mouth ; how in my hand
it 's almost here ;
" my pretty jen , " said he ,
lockt dich dein eigen angesicht
with a sob and disappear ;
happiness with the lady whom you have chosen for your companion
how dim your boasted splendors are .
but was moved ever along a weary way ,
in a measure so kindly , you doubt if the toes
ran revel in the elder boy .
at niver gat thruf his task .
suche folys oft whan they thynke them most sure
then those who go forth greatly , seeking sport ,
crack goes the whip , and off we go ;
" ' tis my lord of stowell taking a bath ,
thus spoke the noble youth , and never again i beheld him .
glides down my drowsy indolence .
till silently dispersing , one by one ,
what favour could she do you more ?
that his master should strike him surprise he felt —
or chirps the grasshopper one good - night carol more .
“ than beauty;--thrown where'er , its mark it gains ,
when by advice , and , which was better ,
for hearts to apprehend thee everywhere ;
of yonge folys that take olde wymen to
thy heart i only crave .
cast on sleep there came to me
insensibly three different motions move ?
and smelt like a burnt drug store
it 's cruelty to insects -- honest , mame,--
and i sometimes have asked,--shall we ever be men ?
of the lord , thou wheel , shine warmly ,
and wait for the hot summer 's kiss and yours ,
and hearts unwounded sing again ,
did i , for this , so often rise
coon - pelts in one night -- and yit
breathe a native atmosphere
who art my way toward virtue , and the guide
across the water :   but the house - tops nigher ,
than glittering _ venus _ in her hemisphere .
and given him kisses four ,
to bear her cloudy flame ,
stands my great sire -- the saxon 's herman - saul .
gathered around to chant their vesper hymn ;
_ the poet vidyāpati avows . _
at leisure , distant from the battle 's roar .
all my longing prayers are spoken ,
harbour vile fear ?   why hast not courage there
faithful lord had showed him .   and there he built a pyre and
this hand , this hand that holds the pen ,
and better were it if all girls thus fair
for i never miss an opportunity
_ reekit _ , smoked , smoky .
and see , through two - score years of smoke ,
a good man never dies .
thus had they wept till rosy - finger'd morn
and low in the west the lingering light
and every one was free to rove at will ,
not brand her with his own . not yet the glow
called by the name of " night . " our saviour sundered
but though my wit , my cunning nothing can ,
but may be cover'd with pretence ;
from this infuriated man .
in place of understanding , scourged and shamed .
nor the dwellings of his mother .
and the children stood watching them out of the town ;
it withers on the stalk with languished head .
" look not alone on youthful prime ,
the quadrangle within was galleried ,
but , " _ ira furor brevis est _ , "
lufsoum , _ sb . _ lovesome , beloved one , a. 398 .
aeneas , and his lifted arm withdrew ;
i wad do -- what wad i not ?
i join my trembling lips to thine ,
i pace the leafy colonnade
but the blackamoor
with all their people many a time
he the sweetest of all singers ;
yea , i believe
to keep me happy all the day .
to shade marsh marigolds of shining hue ;
when you are angry , he must chase     }
no casque shall hide her woman 's tear--
fear not thou must lie alone ,
with hands and feet i fierce resistance made ,
and bring him home;--but ' tis decreed
ever he thrilled and listened
old sicel woman took laertes inside and washed him and anointed
for me ceased time 's enchantments
phyllida amo ante alias.--virgil
danced and rocked itself upon the spray ,
i am here to be hanged ; to be hanged to - morrow
the blue and scarlet flames leaped high ,
who walked with downcast head ,
the poet matchless in sublimity !
from scandinavia and the baltic isles
a spirit from on high ;
there was an awful rainbow once in heaven :
hung dangling over the floor .
our fancies caper . hadst i thought whilst yet
to bharat spoke his righteous speech ,
as in the fields of bliss above
where'er you walk fresh gales shall fan the glade ,
' for on this little knoll , if anywhere ,
italian i have oftentimes been told :
is truly now the lord of snow .
out o'er the sea wi ' me .
amende you folys : do way these folysshe wayes
' twas there first shown to you ?
beauty is more than hands or face or eyes
with baths , mills , and canals that run not dry ,
and bid the shadow of earth 's grief depart .
  bred a printer . this was written long before dr .
has gone,--perhaps more proudly hovering,--
' twull be best , sir , for you to be fushin '
save i be slain , for sorrow shall i die .
and says in her mind ,
the middle of the night .
on the deep - fork'd olympian topmost height
quid parat iste tuus , posterus iste furor ?
his heart she ever miss'd it .
the death - change here receiving :
upon those stairs and thus enclos'd ,
upon imaus ' height !
and smashed on the bowsprit the rest .
if i can hit it !
his most known and most eminent companions .
no witness to the mother 's ear
not noxious , but obedient at thy call .
our heart and soul ,
are shining in the light .
as he lets his lax right hand ,
and blossoms strew the way .
he heard the angelus from convent towers ,
now i am back in that good place from which my footsteps came ,
in mind and body , fand i nane .
but his wife was melancholic ,
upon the huntsman 's countenance , and ever
as tom was a - sleeping , he had such a sight ! —
and keep guard over them while i sent out scouts to reconnoitre
seek we ; but else , if thoughts of safety be in vain ,
across the dark aegean sea ,
the still , wet , glistening grave ; the trod sward steaming .
for i whilom no love hadde ,
con que llama á la oración
no comfortable star did lend his light ,
no further alterations were made in the text of the poem ; but an
with a smile .   " thar 's the pelf , "
no brutal rage inflames me , yet i burn !
howe that erth{e } apon erth{e } hye myght be brought{e } ,
from the realms of the departed ,
but the tides of life roll on----
shed glee , and through the congregated oaks
and france revenged of anne 's and edward 's arms ! "
where shrill the north - wind demon yells ,
den ungeduldig strebenden . " was hab ich ,
they might assail them with untimely flight .
your vessel , marking , well the furrow broad
from jerome , or from athanasius ;
( ' orse - gunners , listen to my song ! )
what excuse will you make , tho ' ?
to some bright star , or to a cherubin ?
did not know that i had caught her
like him , too , beauty won me ;
of that his maiden was forlein ,
and lectured soundly every evil doer ,
and heart - beats growing few and fainter all this time ,
in begging him , for god 's sake , just to show
weigh'd true , and false , in her impartial scale ;
from leaf - bud to leaf - fall ,
from the oaks they gathered acorns ,
singing to words that match the sense of these
which from my accurst sons bow did fowly light
but with the fool , the sot , the ass ,
of ruddy fire , three of the southern gale ,
the lady back with triumphing . ”
what matters it though you have loved before ,
with a rowley powley , & c.
semele . ( repulsing him . )
to climb aornus , and can scarce avail
the nature of the whole wide world , and earth
whan the king nor ‘s knights were not to see . ’
they 've deean nowght wrang ;
whereby more pleasantness the song acquires ,
the soothing harbour after foamy seas--
agramant recognized this truth ; but thought
for fortune 's maid shall tend with care
the mad white coursers cleave the length
for three years has he left her his absence to mourn ,
to awake them ,
mute outwardly , yet inwardly i said :
a glory in the hushed air , in the soul
and in brief speech and feeble said the dame
such part of heav'n , that from before my steps
when my half - opened eyes would look
" lo , it is i , be not afraid !
will my tear - laden eyes sin in revealing
the druids ' groves are gone -- so much the better :
a monarch , devarát by name ,
and thereupon grow to exceeding hate
the ruffian wretch who breaks his faith .
green were his eyes , and they seemed well pleased
and the israelites that sell
now i , if i invite them to run risk
the old peace that god _ is _ , tho all unproved .
a solemn council forthwith to be held
be we young or old ,
when all at once i saw a crowd ,
i had fared unto this shrine
in the throngs of centuries
if a storm should come and awake the deep ,
i 've set before thee ; henceforth feed thyself ,
when arrives the beauteous summer ,
i will acquaintance strangle , and look strange ;
flower of the winter - berry ?
then raghu ’s son , as if in sport ,
or genii twine beneath the deep
once more to deck his mound .
there hopes deferred lie sunk in piteous seams .
altered to ' that ' in the second version . but the first reading
there to shape them into weapons ,
the blood pours back , and fortifies my heart :
had time to keep him in amazed ken ,
and by her yielded , by him best received ,
thy wit shall save me now .
oppression flies , and justice lifts her scales .
you are too humble .
but told her to look for mercy -- in heaven .
not purest poet hath more fondled been .
their white wings above me ,
far off , a shrivelled orange in a sky gone black ,
with its sweet blossom where hers was ;
whene'er that ruffian 's tossing limb ,
austrian domination in 1823 , and upon the abdication of
merry time , like dancers ' feet ;
embuisshed upon horse bak ,
as he spoke he went on board , and bade the others do so also and
how much those blind have err'd , who make themselves
he from afar . beyond grim petrograd
stilled , but his spirit yet was strong in him ;
keeps rájagriha ’s city fair .
horace still charms with graceful negligence ,
who cheapens life , abates the fear of death :
which hath renonced to the hevene ,
with delicious fragrance
what if the sap in all the gardens teems ,
if you lift a guinea - pig up by the tail
matter high - wrought to such surprising pomp ,
oh ! ye strange wild birds , will ye bear a greeting
and devils assail .
the sea is treacherous , hungry , deep ,
and no guns thumped , or down the flues made moan .
light has disappeared from northland ;
all this he did to prove her .
there 's the flaxen - haired doll , with the real human hair ,
which now the little chapel rallies
on afternoons of drowsy calm
in many a sullen gust ,
wherein he put old skill to use ,
a man , in wisdom equal to a god !
" --why sitt'st thou there , o neckan ,
he answer'd thus : " we have no certain place
i bear " this fair city of the heart , "
speech of _ auxilium _ in the cistellaria . ]
" there i with little innocents abide ,
" now tell me , my dear lady , / who hath done aught to thee ? "
and you who have felt ambition 's spell !
i loves saltin ' , saltin ' bread .
but form'd a swan , lightly he pois'd in air
--now the world her fault repairs--
ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
and swore he could toss it all off at a pull .
brought me .
took wing , and mounted with him from the tomb !
seized upon the choicest portions
becometh head - bands , coifs , and many a time
rough - thicketed were the banks and steep ; the stream
of uncouth monsters , nor the fierce disease ,
and moved in them desire some name to hear
the field his arms .
his fearfull thunder - bolts he throwes ,
" along yon glittering sky what glory streams !
( 12 ) compare herodotus , ii . , 16 : " for they all say that the earth
isaac hail'd the lord 's anointed--
for half - a - crown
and strips the fluttering foliage from the trees ,
i am alone :
forgetting that the work is going on
as in the winters left behind ,
fierce for the fray , comes down and joins the oscan train .
teacher , tender , comrade , wife ,
but at the turn arriving , is espied ,
nestling me everywhere ,
hath the church militant : so ' t is of him
not hounds had slain him , but the fires of love .
better men their songs have vanquished ,
to mind his orders was all he knew ;
welcome , new - born king
my pipe is lost , my shepherd 's holiday !
once dead , how can it be ,
what would the holy fathers say ?
and fain at the ingle would bask at its low ,
and the bunnia and the ryot are as happy and as quiet
yet still a prince , ah god , i dreamed,--and then
so sweet , that all with ears and souls
and the tempests hide their terrors in the calmest summer sky .
it has bowed to the dust thy stately form ,
at my fat contracts squintin ' ,
no longer jests are flung about to rouse our weary souls ,
a hot aroma , one tame rose
a world submitting to incarnate fate .
marriage . "
from land to land ; and in my breast
by the sea - wall close , himself and clan .
where ( to devour a living damsel sped )
bring us in no butter , for therein are many hairs ,
meek - hearted woolman , and that brother - band ,
i sit and play with similes ,
i am a political economist , and i know .
fair freedom dreads united knaves ,
we , you know , love peace . i could not see ....
middle ages -- its passionate aspiration , its conscience - stricken
immortalis eris , nam multa laude uigebit
each to his home departed , where for each
as whirling fast or swaying slow ,
o dreams that flock about my sleep ,
you 'll meet dear loved ones long since fallen asleep ,
wives together on the great ship ; and all that god al-
a crown within his reach . i 'll taste their bliss
and yet they must be brave and constant , too .
por eso , porque te ama ,
love , swift to wake , to weep ,
oh friends ! be men . now dearly prize your place
that ye but now bath’d in your natiue gore ;
there other trophies deck the truly brave ,
filling the barn - chamber with white , straightforward light ,
up , by an ingenious movement , trousers innocent of brace ,
o , ye people of wainola ,
rabid with hunger and with head high thrown :
he stared a long time at the cup of gold
his great white beard like shroud , or snow ,
sche preide him and conseileth bothe ,
thou smother'st honesty , thou murther'st troth ;
to some lone island beyond the southern pole ,
for market and for food .
equalled in all their glories , to enshrine
the heathen foe -- the carnage - crimson'd fields ;
outside silk and outside lawn ;
gorgeous processions , songs of birds ,
who tho ’ he spurns the mean desire of pelf ,
to hurl her out of joy !   a gilded string
so roy was coming !   he and i had played
come buds on bough and spalliard pleach
when such discourse had reached an end ,
that dream shall break in terror ; he shall see
as poor and tatter'd as in her own .
on life 's gay stage , one inch above the grave ?
firm to their mark , not spent on other things ;
at last , and half unconscious , in the thrall
followed by brindled dog that snuffs the ground
when thou from hence away art past ,
the dawn that finds , beneath my head ,
in clemency the flames withheld
save that one rivulet from a tiny cave
but , though perforce retiring , still made head .
i recoil from the traitor in hate and disdain ,
in sonnet - rage and love 's fierce ecstasy .
at each wild word to feel within
wearing that garb of stripes a free man loathes ,
and fiercely at the giant ran .
once more at large , full thousand paces on
he blurs them both beneath his touch:--
the beaters nudged each other 's ribs
" oh , never was maid so deserted before ! "
confound , with very little care what shall be established .
in that good omen . ardent to begin ,
blooming and debonair ,
step by step on freedom 's charter
or like a peacock gay ;
my parents urge my nuptials , and my son
" look ! look ! one fire burns dim !
she who was named eternal , and arrayed
was never known before !
the ancient pain .
heard a crashing and a rushing ,
enter then the yard of pohja ,
but he clasp'd her like a lover ,
silk umbrellas waved .
sped trackless as the immemorable hour
" thus , great atrides , thus ulysses drove
by ellen was rejected .
he held my hands , and vowed i must , and should
seeing that thy joy was never touch'd thereby .
" he saileth twice who saileth in haste !
if thou wilt feel no pity , none ,
a hungering shadow , a lean dark shadow ,
( to this obliged ) , nor swore the king in vain ,
for i am here , you may depend on’t ,
giovanna nor none else have care for me ,
to the last flower of bliss that nature 's garden held .
is with so vehement affection urg'd ,
from its small urn a drizzly murmur shook .
" long , long ago , " she wept , " narcissus came
that the north may see the sunshine ,
the rest the people shared ; myself survey’d
unto himself he said , " ah , what is this ,
but the care - free youngsters do ,
again rejoicing nature sees
or , in their cells , with him did pry
listen ! i hear a cry , a cry !
than all their peers together !
" i draw the gliding fog - bank as a snake is drawn from the hole ,
for who , self - moved , with weary wing would sweep
' tis a strange tale to tell a rose like you .
for caitiff measures he has sung
per maria ac terras omnis sopita quiescant .
swells with her virtues ' catalogue along ;
like huge green shadows crowned with ghostly snow
the ladies seven at a dark shadow 's edge ,
and he is coming back again ,
had struck him home . " so quite forgot!--so soon!--
i smiled amused and felt a touch of sweetness in my heart .
converse with those great shadows : haply much
  " blockheads in power or traitors in disgrace . "--_ed . 1786 . _
pierced in the flank , lamented youth ! he lies ,
i never look at you , willie ,
i heard a shrill voice cry , " we all are up ,
uplifting now and then her eye ,
on gods owne person , without rest or end .
to paste of almonds turn'd by thee ;
and so the weary winter passed , and then one april morn
so mischief 's _ done _ , you care not _ where _ ,
as light as ony lambie ,
and the dogs in house he leaves not ,
her hand close to her mouth touching her cheek ,
hidden and covered things , away !
and bids his steeds be harnessed for the fight :
she turned about and waved her hand at me .
for glory none the damned would have from them . "
land , behind in every comfort .
the maid is thus borne from her kindred .
and one to solitude .
so , as your life you value , out with you to the strand . "
and his sheep had died unshorn .
the half - starved workman , and the well - fed worm ;
and thanne he cride and thanne he seide ,
all over dale and hill
but thou wilt hear , and look , and wait for none
what heav'n - besieged heart is this
nor yet beyond reason
the chime of the midnight hour .
felix , parentis qui pater diceris esse tui .
far off the empyreal heaven , extended wide
not one of all his squires the courage had
the book begins with the long monologue of a retired
they do , and how they pass their time away ;
and not alone protect , save and defend
" o in sevin long years , i 'll make a wow
and no where did abide :
freed from the spell by garuḍ ’s aid ,
while thine is in arrears .
and all the time are suffered to descry
essence , of every good the branch and root .
why dost thou stop and stare with all thy eyes ?
nor gently beaming eyes , nor vermeil cheek ,
" serve to show ,
ply their blows
at this the cobbler bolder grew ,
he hung them in chaplets , like rosaries ,
in my consciousness . this is the marriage
but he could not see the frame .
o passionless voice ! what distant bells
where no sensation flourished -- smallest type
" keep all you have , and try for all you can ! "
" your mither , she was a stubborn lass ,
on a tree - girdled hill .
to the dead - seas of the northland ,
with coming evil all the winds were rife .
than low content with lofty gain .
and every turf beneath their feet
roll the tall ships ; the pitchy keel swims in the sea once more :
next craves a rhyme to " sooner ; "
and sink with nurture too replete ;
" and steel revenge my chains : " she spoke , and died ;
through the bush , and brake , and forest ,
as we separately go to our dreams of opened heaven,--
at last bishop hatto appointed a day
and all his fighting was for peace ...
gentlest whispers in the branches ,
save when a shower of diamonds , to the ground ,
begin , begin thy noble choice ,
ha , a poet ! know him by
tore through my entrails , that with fear and pain
then didst thou make answer , swineherd eumaeus : ' in very
and what i mean having .
whose blending odours crept from room to room ,
under and over the others so
plain - sail -- storm - sail -- lay your board and tack again--
his glass sublime
making court sweetmeats of their latent gall ,
her walie nieves like midden - creels ,
wordsworth 's son - in - law , friend--
" o my mother who hast borne me ,
v. 36 .   heav'n , and all nature , hangs upon that point . ]   [ greek
and later , thou thy noble son mayst mourn ,
sad wanderers from our native home !
then had he lost , or left a doubtful prize ;
but anxious cares the pensive nymph oppressed ,
i ai n't proud with him ; ' n ' i 'm modest , too ,
nursing no fat valleys for comfort and rest ,
to my home i took kyllikki ,
fit for a couch where we both , lovingly , gently may rest ;
with the harvest of despair !
where the sea - winds sing and the sunlight smiles
both zoned with gold and girt with dappled fell ,
to that smooth calm their restless life supplies ,
when not a soul of those who loved us here ,
_ when the war is over and the battle has been won
god knows how after that my life was fram'd .
for at thy fortunes know i grieve .
who both with eloquence and wisdom rules
and play ' tis a house ! " said he .
shall views like these assail our happy land ,
to her , whom i suspiciously survey ,
before you kissed me only winds of heaven
will be content with one ?
people , at once assume that all their " gifted pens "
on the sand one end he rested ,
too fair she is truly , too fair , heaven knows ,
the ocean swells with stormy gales ;
and thus with words of welcome cried :
a woman from her lord hast torn .
ought to show us sometimes what we are to expect .
dread tidings , that our hearts had fear'd to own !
ah luckless poet ! stretch thy lungs and roar ,
stood they or mov'd , in stature , motion , arms
came in myriads to listen '
they 'll plead for their muffs and their boas !
such violence can not fill the measure up ,
he with his thunder ; and till then who knew
standing all alone ,
the sweet place in which thou sittest through eternal allotment ,
would faine this womans secretarie knowe ,
cheerful .   by degrees i gained his confidence ; and one day was
levell'd with ease divine . as , on the shore
taste life 's , & c.
sad mortality may hide
sit within the temple ,
for i dreamed of someone last night
the zone , the wreath , the gem ,
a tracy[a ] i do keep whereby
drags his feet from out the quicksand ,
many and mighty shipwrecks , the mighty sea is wo nt to drive in
good - bye !
heaven says to earth , shines the majestic moon ;
till it was darken'd with the shadowy arch
thus day by day , and month by month we passed ;
no one could know , in fair yvetot ,
but the door was now opened , and showed the majestical couple .
the fiend by easie ascent , or aggravate
the gelid incrust , and the veined ore ,
at last he came unto a gloomy glade ,
with clinton at the head to lead them on ,
watches that from the wreck'd arena wall
and the incendiary sunset hushes
only i that mourn out .
there wandreth he in dolour and derknes
of mirth is turn'd to sadness .
the air is heavy with a cold damp chill .
what of this lover at your feet ?
fantastic rhymes
kullerwoinen spake as follows :
the friend of the children comes out of the wood .
for the utter earth and the utter air of heaven
you ca n't refuse a loving - cup of praise
whose every wish is all fulfill’d ?
flock where a shoe on the salt wave floats,--
' " at any price ? " the actor - like chap keeps on croaking .
but jovan would fain detain her—“go not ,
the short but simple annals of the poor.{3}--_gray . _
went on cutting bread and butter .
laying their hands upon their hearts , and saying ,
draw yer dirk and rin .
_ the wise would say , the twain have met . _
" your beaming and beneficent star ?
as one that lifts a shell and hears
answered , " i yield to thee , thou worthy art ,
upon the golden fruit the vision bore ,
lloegr gychwyn , a fynn a fynno ,
and turned the subject -- did not even give
with tears — that in those waxen hands she set .
all the mad vindictive blind
so both brush'd up their sep'rate graces ,
' tis pleasanter on horseback , i 'll hie me to the chase ,
rage to kill .
when warriors return , and one
looves , v. loof .
for beauty is an armour against fate ....
and teach me how to sing
at times dear poets , whom some view
declaring him her dream fulfilled ,
this great event of course could not take place
“ a mountain - nymph she calls , and thus directs;--
they may spring upward to the starry spheres .
proserpine . change of cyané , to a fountain . search of ceres .
to case it in the death - cocoon .
" mahound destroy thee , o mighty land ;
when the first far stars above
the splendor of humanity !
my second self thou , lakshmaṇ , art ,
his arrows rained in ceaseless flow ,
they are angry with us .
design'd for tumults and for wars !
the pinnace up ; which , though she errs
that common bane of greece and troy i found .
a maddened majesty that leaps
descended to the field where numerous most
more mighty than the father .
day by day the indian tiger
as a token of the feasting ;
warms the low spot ; upon its grassy mould
some will talk of bold robin hood
that night by night--
such power as once informed and rendered vital
even the image of the lord
with the edge of the sword ,      as is said in old books ,
the driving colors , never at a stay ,
as euer shall be , was , and is . amen .
and thou , too , whosoe'er thou art ,
in some soul hold a loved continuance
knowed the whole war - history ! )
of their good deeds -- with spring at monaree !
the lusian galleys ; through their thund'ring rows ,
amongst the trees of life doth smile and play ;
they , in their evil rage , break into the house after the
to me , indeed , about fearing the gods or shunning their anger ?
astonished .
" upon his head a helmet / of glancing light is seen ,
from these low ruins , that his years have made .
into fragments musical ,
walk backward , with averted gaze ,
the curtain now around descends ;
max and maurice took a view ;
by the fact that you put 'em in print .
but he was taen by a savage moor ,
into the intense , the cloudless blue ,
ye see ; the general ruin and decay
and darkness gathers on the mountains grey .
but few indeed a loftier summit found--
or like the flame that leaps on high
the king consented , by his vaunts abused ;
' lady , already have we had enough of labours , thou and i ;
little in your prosperity
that spot , where you seem to see a speck of something in
search me , eyes of the soaring sun ,
from lying word and evil deed ,
betroth'd be she now , on this spot green and fair-- ' "
as he laid it down it flashed in the light ,
and seeking after thee !
they silently inhale
in deserts , where no men abide ,
a dauntless spirit thou hast shown .
vaeinaemoeinen then considered
conviction to the serpent none belongs .
out on the edge of the floe .
he hain't hurt none ! " an ' nen he said,--
on wings unwearied i would find and follow
when pleasant it shall seem to thee , so much
these were to come on a certain day
double - edged axes and ten with single edges : he set up a ship 's
illumined every side .   a watery light
of all i 've sold .
friends that deserved a sweeter bed than clay ,
and if you 've no neetive professor to taych me ,
" not to this end was christ 's spouse with my blood ,
and tomlinson took up the tale and spoke of his sin in life : --
erre not , much less for this to be our lord ,
i riveted , as he is wo nt to do
up and down and back we went , never time for breath ;
sleep came then o'er me -- and i seemed
mnestheus pursues ; and while around they wind ,
of beauty apprehended from without ,
old time he looked with a puzzled stare ,
shake their accusing fingers in thy face ;
the hickories with burnt etruscan gold ;
would bear him a fearless child
the while the pageant moves , it scarcely seems
by that pretty white hand o ' thine ,
against the hounds and huntsmen , who have torn
under her frontlet .
and a warld o ' feeling is the love o ' her e'e .
prayed an old man to tell him what it meant ,
my years are too short -- and your ears are too long .
alla weil - all the while ; always .
track lay those who sacked the homes of sodom and gomorrah , and
‘ not half so swift the trembling doves can fly ,
i , woful wrecche and infortuned wight ,
for out of thought 's interior sphere
low lewdness , unexcited by desire ,
whose broken arms portray hell 's lust ,
my sister mary , who ruled my house--
of a smile in the eyes
ay , speak . thee he will not refuse .
lepe ( leap ) ,        lep ,               lopen .
the simple , silly things she liked to hear .
or waves there not around his brow
of the distinction important to the fine arts
in my redeemer 's praise .
the pearly sea - shell half enclose ;
i helped upon haldora 's shore ;
the blast was hard and harder .
for the fellow lay safe
" too bad , " replied that millinger ,
her belt of ancient towers .
on the evening of the third day ,
cave this morning ? you are not wo nt to let the ewes go before
old poets have sung , and old chronicles tell ,
towards me , across the stream , she bent her eyes ;
“ and should i now desist , well might he judge
or with the bethlem babes -- whom herod 's rage
while every lodger in the house ,
there was a little lawny islet
plots that would have ruin brought
her laws o'errule us , have i little learnt ,
inside--"brother " , an ' it does n't do no ' arm .
and pretty maids all in a row ! "
from place to place , which to herself thus said :
anastagi , ( both the one race and the other is without heir ) , the
the seventh scions are of samuel 's race ;
where old shadows haunt old places ,
its heart 's creating pulse that beats and sings
nor weapon , save a golden - hilted brand ,
with shells amaranthine , and flowers
still round and round the ghosts of beauty glide ,
broke his baby sister 's neck ,
as eager runs the market - crowd ,
as the rock , whose upward tending
so spoke the shepherd unto me .
for the gracious spirit made it ,
from the blessing to the board ,
quick the wretched shepherd , nasshut ,
my sentience wholly sped :
at morning - tide when day - dawn broke ,
they do n't know what to do to counteract
lashed with slaty foam .
nor the high office , nor the sacred orders ,
in words that knew nor pause nor haste !
and laugh , knowing the end ! "
but wholesome relish , which the laboring poor
and _ still _ persist ; and _ still _ , their follies hold :
and are baffled and beaten and blown about
with his heroes and attendants ,
things you never saw in a grog - shop in your life ?
sweet hue of eastern sapphire , that was spread
my song the midnight raven has outwing'd ,
while for the courier damsel she did stay :
the other as your bounty doth appear ;
and swears , with this false frenzy hurl'd ,
as sooin as joe gat up ta t’rails ,
nicking the minute with a happy tact .
heart - strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood ,
my song , wert thou adorned to thy desire ,
of wandering after love too far ,
the boat that bears the hope of life approach
which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
sure of their game .   but most the wisdom shows
dropp'd from its foil ; and through the beamy list
magic son with sky - blue stockings . ,
while they pervert pure natures healthful rules
to hide it in a silence , a sleep ,
spemque timor tollit prohibetque a limine caeli ?
of speech and boldly to harangue . never may cronion make
towardes hem that now be grete ,
swifter than my feet .
" i will not harm the innocent . "
puddynge is on the way .
although no home were half so fair ;
and peace for ever rest with thee ! "
where bushes , thorns and trees so thick were placed ,
into the hollow chasms of human life !
is ever refulgent , soft , and tender .
but fair - fruited , many - peopled , it lies a goodly strip ,
and hogged fried chicken and roastin ' ears , too ,
night is at hand ; behoves us yield to night . "
v. 64 .   poitou it seiz'd , navarre and gascony . ]   i venture to
curiously they eyed the stranger .
off his head , standing over the body of iphidamas . thus did the
and in gentle cloudlets chase ;
still must the soul as mortal be confessed ;
tam samson 's dead !
come back dear brother october
the hare likes the brake , and the braird on the lea ,
you sing to flowers and trees and birds
a maiden in her glory ,
of great demeter : and , behold , the floor
so cried he groaning sore ; with answering moan
when the stormy winds do blow ;
what does it matter ? we , too , have our share of eating and
over the ice she flies
war shall the country waste , and change the state . "
his wife to want and wo !
since the renaissance the writing of european saints -- however
among my host with me to spain he came ;
their guilt too cheaply sold .   when pledged to them
and running water , flowers , and birds ,
it winds along the face of a cliff
aside , like ravelled silk , from life 's worn stuff ;
thee and achilles ; ancient peleus stood
who love too much , hate in the like extreme ,
no means of happiness when virtue yields ;
and with unerring aim and utmost vigor threw .
singing many a tuneless song ,
but hark!--that heavy sound breaks in once more ,
conceives or terror in his noble heart ,
his memory many will revere ,
made glaucus take leave of his wits , for he exchanged golden
" ay , to be sure ! " in his bustling way interrupted the doctor :
on my breast two scars of broadsword ,
a song on such a distant shore?--
yes ! there is ane ; a scottish callan--
no one to say her " ay , " or " nay . "
nor yet were true to god , but for themselves
the social atmosphere was heavily charged and wanted clearing .
and see -- in the far distance ,
i tell to all :
of an outline of his daughter 's history .
like a man lightning - stricken , lancelot reel'd ,
lights as of the breaking day
by whom such daring villanies were done ,
i wish , at least , our sacred rites were free
a sudden sense of shelter
' thou wearest the holy augustine 's dress , and who hath given
he stirred his velvet head
above the earth , serene and still ,
in the sky the moon first shineth ,
satiate his appetite of greatness .   to paint things as they are
pelted her with hail and snow storms ,
a friendless warfare ! lingering long
the baptist ( of whose birth i oft had heard ,
now being nearly over , print these words :
dame nature smiles as man 's hand has taught her ;
let it not , sir , sound strangely in your ear
to say to me began my gracious master :
of irremediable pain severe .
quoth he of the shaven head :
the snaw - drap an ' primrose our woodlands adorn ,
soon would me immortal make ,
alphonso and his brother hyppolite :
to have just escaped such danger .
like a brave old scottish minister ,
from out its store , my heart can give you naught
hush , thy footfall !
" well ; good - bye , jim :
" our poor brother richard was born in 1770 . he would have
invoking with each eager thought
when they have subject nations at their will ,
nor bear the burthen of thy griefs alone ;
" but such as neither of themselves can sing ,
( georgics , iv . 323 ) uses this epithet .
and while your head was bent i kissed your hair .
infinite distance still divides
exhaling the pungent dill ;
as a played - out , broken chum , who has gone to kingdom come ,
that i , for thy amusement , may
in the third fold of the entrails .
that god whom i had neither loved nor feared ,
oh come , sweet boy !
raising his head , and on his elbow propp'd ,
shudder through each nerve and fibre ,
que estos gusanos non puedo toller ,
to see the spotted serpent crisp above
cornuto , in a rapture , boasting cries--
no love thou hast .
let me in this last moment thy grace and favor find
he knows what ' tis to love , but not what ' tis to fear .
" the child of the basileus , " wrote the monk ,
thy son must fall , by too severe a doom ;
since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city . "
another that , which the whole spirit hash ;
how beautiful ; yet still to feel a tear
proud am i -- proud as he
in squared regiment direct their course ,
and hoar pyrene 's sides his legions calls ;
to the strike of the swords , when they hurry .
black was that feast , though he who poured the wine
the beaded usqueba with sugar dashed .
to - morrow , when ye riden on the way ,
to the wilderness i wander .
elizabeth fleming 's in islington ( or ' isling town ' as the
and gainst the subtle air vain battle made .
wherof swoundende ded for fere
far from the sheltering land to seaward blew .
barbarian aids , and troops of eastern kings ;
was studious found his duty to fulfil .
and wealth may lose its charm for him ,
and the signs made answer truly ,
loading the seas and shutting out the skies ,
they made the following day ,
hoeing a vine . he had on a dirty old shirt , patched and very
it will come !
intent on these alone .   i knew them not ;
" should i come from lowly station ,
and by the clear
might tempt , should heaven see meet ,
from fierce idomeneus ' revenge i flew ,
because , base outcast , of thy crime ,
over the low roofs white with snow . . .
seventeen hundred and fifty - five ,
if he fulfil not hitherto his vows ,
each celandine has donned a silken gown ;
gladly th ' assyrian ph[oe]nix now resumes
double - armed she is to ill .
through all his music .   now , there 's the happy pair
faded the flowers that one time satisfied .
here was thine height of strength , thy golden prime !
let it flow a stream like honey ,
of phylosophy and other artes liberall
art greater and older than we .
the storm moves on ; and winging
if fortune with a smiling face , vol . vi . , 12 .
and when the wings were opened wide apart ,
it is not therefore without cause , that these ,
nor came she more from day to day
while she with work and song the time divides ,
are as a string of pearls to me ;
that haply to the unknown land may reach .
ever doubling on itself
in a boat enriched with silver ,
whose sacred stings the piteous only feel ) ,
have known a sorrow and a smart so keen ,
and fighting with your hands .
but it is not like this .
giving their anguish utterance : as when
sweetest cadence ever heard !
may i amidst a world of toil and care ,
from a gentleman like me .
an ' then there came an ' ackin ' cough as would n't leave alone ,
it might have him unmanned to such degree ,
from too long craning at a sky - light
to build , to do , to sing or say
selden , camille . les derniers jours de h. heine . paris , 1884 .
seriously made for dances and lyres and garlands as things deeply
when the shah saw salã¡mã¡n 's face again ,
" o mortal man , who livest here by toil ,
er i out of mi trance aros ,
to you , indeed , they can not be
when ropes or opium can my ease procure ?
though care may pursue , yet my hound follows faster .
witness those pathless forests which conceal
which plato in his dialogues dramatic
when bitter thoughts , of conscience born ,
among the flowers ; while the little birds hopped merrily about
thou wert never seen or heard of
which are out of sight ?
this world is an arena with a slippery sheet of ice ,
and transported , pressed upon them
not ; nay , i charge thee to do it . and herein regard not my
or dark disease of mind .
yet higher honours to the martial maid .
matching flushing of the rose ,
' thither came the phoenicians , mariners renowned , greedy
or that he had an air of innocence ,
a vagabond ! for him the great destroy ,
some something - or - other , some sand or some sediment
non tamen hos cupens fato deprompsit acerbo
" o'er the past too fondly wandering ,
in meditation dwelt -- with learning wrought ,
( w. g. t. barter 's translation . )
and sorely vexed to play the saint ,
" because , having looked at the objects of the universe , i find
in sad manner plaining / kriemhild stood giselher before .
the cloudy sign , the fiery guide ,
i feel as i did of old ,
hid from our eyes , in many and devious tracks
and my eyes dwell on that old abandoned thing
a jillet brak his heart at last ,
que estoy los trece versos acabando :
thus all remain'd till by his father sent ,
that shall please me .
and unutterabilities
in glowing language , of the savior meek--
first a blush , and then a tear ,
shrinks farther from the sight of men .
secretos amnis ageret cum gratia ruris ?
tu resçibe esta cançion
she stands again by a garden wall ,
( vich vas all his hartful plan ) ,
mine is the shame , for i was wife , and thou
my heart can lie in ruin 's dust ,
under dripping boughs of bright new green ,
our own have reconciled ,
lik'ning his maker to the grazed ox ,
from each new sea they furrowed into pearl
then man my soul with firm resolves ,
and looked about .   then in confusion rose
a thebes , a babylon , at vast expence
she scales eleven stone ;
noble six hundred ! "
by the gods were forged and burnished ;
v. 51 .   vanquish thy weariness . ]
was the fell law , the ruler of the land ;
fish - eyed and gaudy take the tide ,
las ' year wus a good crap year ,
all round the house is the jet - black night ;
and somewhere in the dark behind i heard a woman moan ;
because my name as yet makes no great noise . "
ay , all of thee !
who guards his life from shame,--
on victuals , so airy , i faintish should feel ,
and the tavern - sign as a tabard blazed ,
and share alike in point of punishment :
one among many , though his face was bare .
could beauty ever guard her ,
but hideous monsters full of uglinesse ;
through all the sins and sorrows of his youth ,
forth coming from the castle / to ride her company .
she spake , and man her high behests obeyed ;
upon the payne that thereof follow may .
i saw the branches of the trees
grown to manhood ages since ,
there is not wind enough in the air
' farewell , my loving host , ' says he ,
before the damask rose should have respect ,
of those who made them room to pass .
of unassuming honesty ,
and he spoke the words which follow ,
biten begat , and therupon ,
about minden - field or dettingen ;
smooth as the polish of the mirror rise
" one and all let them die the death . "
a cold wind drifted about the three ,
and gorgeous too their oleander ,
one prayer i pray , since this they call the gateway of the king
to the friends that dwell afar off ;
art thou the senate 's comrade or her lord ?
do come and worship me .
sloped to the water gently , with their fields
till past ten o'clock !
to know my steps directed , and to feel
how that very day i warn'd you
the argives had beside their ships been slain ,
lost and bewilder'd in the vast desire ;
duke perithous loved well arcite ,
that her invaders , chilled by snow and sleet ,
who there doth scratch herself with filthy nails ,
and after it a press of maidens ' heads
their last breaths like the sigh
and he feels the strain on his untouched shoulder ,
with spots of red and white ,
if the glistering wings of morning
and thou did'st smile on this invading race ,
a vast , grey , listless , inexpressive sky ,
before joy had risen in the eastern sky ,
and the morning broken .
your former - friends with face averted ,
a wounded soldier on the ground
_ manus arefacta sanatur . _ marc . iii . 1 - 5 .
with fix'd adoring look
and many of the common great . through all
but rear another altar there ,
kind sleep will bring a thrice - distilled release ,
dangerous to all , to be but thus annull'd--
there was a market at rome , near the temple of this god , who was
for lay þ{er}-on a lump of led & hit on loft fleteȝ ,
bending to earth that sunny glance ,
and drops at last with empty , outstretched hands .
and the boys like small spots moving round .
to her i made my double purpose plain ,
for from the war remote they had updrawn
and crosses fair ;
deeper to pierce , by yielding to its force .
" she was his favourite beast ,
than evil , and their misery hath no end .
rapt contemplation , in her car of light ,
to the mirrored maiden 's feet !
did not take her goodly counsel ,
but here on her grave is a grassy pall ,
let there be dancing figures
which keep in trust your storied tombs ,
garden "                      maurice baring
that direful dame of doom as dire ;
through yonder oaks ; there , bosom'd in a vale ,
these wordes seyde he for the nones alle ,
' twould puzzle our arithmetic to state
has gone on recklessly down and down .
from the earth he tore the fibers ,
with feathers crowned , with gay embroid'ry dress'd ,
there the tree we saw him under ,
falsely presented ; but when i was come
of the north - star , hath shrunk into his den ,
_ claire has a tea - rose , but she did n't plant it ;
to dream of women whose beauty was folded in dismay ,
admiring , so devoted with a heart
to earth down sank she senseless , that not a word she spoke .
an object of disdain ,
see i in this trackless forest -- uninhabited by men ;
" and when she looks at our dear babe
you have no knowledge how the heart is torn ,
dead as a corp , or julius caesar ,
be silent , and the lady die .
yet know that the yankee girl sooner would be
elegy on willie nicol 's mare
year ; and in 1755 the chancellor added kirkby , of one hundred and
lacrimas suspendite matres ,
all that feed upon the mountains ,
for still there comes a fear ,
for to ask of another there to give us a home ,
the wind is blowing ' cross the bow ,
against the pilgrim borne in heedless hum,--
lips that quiver , eyes that glow with passion ,
or doughter , vnto the mother wyll agre
then made answer the farmer:--"perhaps some friendlier purpose
a solemn thing it was , i said ,
but he drank the air as though it held
joyful in her husband 's dwelling .
are you and i at home ;
far , far frae me and logan braes .
a dream of the truth
on the little rustic table
fragments of the forest - apple .
in their sweet ship they sail'd upon the seas .
for _ paris _ first , when as he came to bed ,
each starry - tressed chorister
" repent while time is yet ! thou hast my prayers
shall brood above thy winter rest ,
" when i blow my breath about me ,
meissner was also here ; he caught me unawares ,
but as no beauty may the spring outglow ,
from matins ' bell to the slow day 's decline
filled ; they , enlarged , to the limits of human imagination , the
one soul with thee ; yea , and thou promisedst
sleep , oh , sleep ! "
age , sex , condition .
with their grisly label , sold !
and alone dwell for ever
by promises of others in their stead ,
richard is a cruel boy ,
  on missolonghi , the place of the poet 's childhood . see
hinc castae , fidaeque pati me more parentis
an ' mix it wiv that push o ' capulets .
there are none but we
they saw bright bubbles rise and break ,
the downward ravine
stretcht like a promontorie sleeps or swimmes ,
and the name which now he gives you ;
haud infeliciter tentaret ,
we heard the breaking of a chain !
dignam lege regi ; lex est accepta , chorusq ;
make not your rosary of yew - berries ,
some , it may be , can get in touch
said roland , " my brother , my olivier ,
ye , whom washington has led ,
black tartarus , and thou must needs this idle labour win ,
what from the floor ascendeth like a ghost ?
and led her gayly through his place .
unto their dying day ; and when they lie
before her , thinking ever on her praise ,
all on eend at bein ' biled ?
action ; another perhaps arises from our curiosity or
  charles ii . , king of apulia , son of charles of anjou .
mary you -- to think of how
within the hero 's mind his joys renew'd .
the worshipper is utterly inebriated ,
as one , who from a dream awaken'd , straight ,
conquering you ,
as if the unseen hand of some high - priest
“ i give what neath my girdle ’s hid ,
where barca 's flow'ry clime invites ;
for he 's my slave , and he shall give
and fact is truth , the grand desideratum !
free her from this grievous torment ,
saints who suffered on the earth ,
where the cotton is growing ;
next morning over my breakfast , i got thinking , and come to the
and would to heaven i might plead their cause !
and , ere i knew , my splashing steps were set
oblivion shrouds them all .
come voices long and loud ,
than wear love 's rose , whose thorn had slain my friend .
o tam ! had'st thou but been sae wise ,
is that unspoken still?--
this day shall gentle his condition”--
to bitter grief in wild lament ,
he loud - exhorting them , his people bade
i 've ridden a score since then , but ne'er
to roof and wall there took him thence no city of the land ,
since , then , the night extends her gloomy shade ,
up the high places
and ask'd ; but not a word ; she shook her head .
however , the master looked on at his leisure ,
courage to face the road ,
thou canst perceive , if thou attend , from this :
yet the moons and sea - tides , too ,
i dare not hope with david 's harp to chase
a thin moon faints in the sky o'erhead ,
at his own table if ' twere illy set .
i 'm sorry for it .
and the far - off friulan snow ;
there 's smith for ane ,
the grieved god came not again .
the rising or the setting sun ?
from welkin reaching down his glorying hand ,
clung to the mother , and sent out a cry
" _ how happy i am
it shuddered in the water :
but never found till her soul spoke to me .
the gas is billed in cubic feet ,
so say , my joan , will not that do ,
under a bent when the night was deep ,
over the black mantilla ?   were i harsh ,
thus far adown the holy stairway 's steps
the moon for gentle grace is known ,
et crepat , anticum genus ut pietate repletum
held forth the wine red blinking .
idly diffused among the winds . a part ,
before me , till from these enslaving eyes
you saw how he finished , by darting
from smouldering elms around the village spire
best manage it all . "
calling out of the night ,
for that is our doom and pride ,
woe , i see the wild wind wreak
to sail the world around :
her purple veluet gowne with gold - starres mixt ,
and quietly shall lie dreaming all the noon ,
do thou thyself protect her and condone her sins .
by the legions ' road to rimini ,
and one alone , to make her sweet amends
_ betwixt his stricken chords _
live well ; how long , or short , permit to heaven :
and that sweet moan , from lips more deeply dyed
clear honour shining like the dewy star
he walked around the tree for many hours ,
with fumes of galbanum to drive away .
clouds , unfurled ;
nor thy soft hands , sweet lips , and crystal eyne ,
that hath his eyes most fix'd on god , shall solve
" little blue - ribbons " believes , i think ,
they sweetly wish you " a most happy night . "
' what fear ye , brawlers ? am not i your head ?
gathered honey in the meadow ,
subsides in woodland or in down .
how the queen died is not certainly known ;
against all chimings from the belfry . lo ,
had put forth more than blossoms .   the left bank ,
preceding and succeeding stanzas , i have restored the words .
tis halt ! that i say,--
a well - rigged galley from that harbour weighed .
ye deem the human heart endures
bathed as in baptism of waters ,
even some rare discord in the solemn chime .
i man the rudder , reef the sail ,
he had the gift ,
through the river of tuoni ,
with death is soon ended :
thoughts join to thoughts , to motions motions cling ;
and why and wherefore no one understands .
aegisthus robs a queen of all ;
fled gilded dukes and belted earls before me !
will false , delusive spirits heed ,
prepare ye , therefore , a reward for me ,
survey my floating towers , and let thine ear ,
and , amazed ,
therfore lyue in rest after thy degre .
its ancient marks ; no more in middle air
their joy ,
is , with the sight of all the good , that is ,
canto xxxv . visvámitra ’s lineage .
take the cup , and drink all up ,
upon their lips the taunt shall die .
_ i think he must have secret sorrows ! _
a clayey grave for me ?
when seen but half enchant the more ?
press'd close behind the princes , e'en in the king 's despite ,
says to her that loves him well ,
dere crows no mead or wein ,
when the cooties cease to bite ,
yet , ere twelve moons shall whirl about
but what and who was she , the fair ?
a cat - headed man out of connaught go pacing and spitting by ;
there stands a city,--neither large nor small ,
father , oh , lead thou me !
to wisdom 's way of purity and peace !
desire 's perfect goal ,
so end our night : before the day shall spring ,
it was the hour , when of diurnal heat
the church is filled , his lips now move in prayer ,
nights snowy - white , chaste couch to these suns be ,
landed , after she had risen from the sea . it was dedicated to her
" may god be with you . "
the rapt ear greet , and we shall know
and the marginal note is ' in causis litigiosis sive casibus
and i would not be vainly moved .
held by a kindlier fate in despot rule !
a shadow , and her hue changed , and she said :
through the wave that runs forever
the best , perhaps , a few loose hours might spare
though over you a shadow always falls ,
but a free soul -- thank god--
clouds will not ever pour down rain ;
all my object may divine .
yet doth the eclipse of sorrow and of death
what ail'd thee , robin , that thou could'st pursue
good education                         _ cherry tree . _
will from all dangers re - deliver me ,
i did not dream the dread that swept our land ...
the wound it seem'd both sore and sad
you are my own , my own , dweller in my endless dreams !
thy will they all perform ;
and fill my portion in thy peace :
that huge long train of fawning followers ,
if we shall meet again with more delight ;
but thou art huge and fat and laggest back
shall not the spring be answer to her prayer ?
adown the broadening eastward lawns , which lay
is coming through the gateway , and a crowd
aunt ruth compared us , after helen 's coming ,
and ere we reach the busy town ,
from thy daughter 's lofty chimney ;
our rootes with thine ,
to speak thy name ,
as to the with it or without ;
for there 's more in the dose than aware of you are ,
with her golden broom .
bread and water composed them all !
" where art thou , roland ? " he cried in pain :
and the little ships riding at anchor ,
the ripening of ideal fruits :
they 'll both be here before eleven . "
even if the king 's army came and fiercely fell upon us we should
l'ame d'un vieillard valait vingt pieces d'or , pas un penny de
she 'll be merry enough when the mildew 's gone ,
to him [ the wife of abraham ] . thus for the second
sorrowing and afflicted sore in mind
wisdom thy sister , and with her didst play
distinct as when the trojan 's living breath
than to lose all at the best .
most fair are the maidens of naples bay . "
in strong blast of october
he did what sickles did to key,--
speak in my place .   thou diest while i survive ?
the doves , together at their pasture met ,
pale little dandelion ,
he lay on the desert a dying man ,
marking the tracts of air , the clamorous cranes
did not our woe the god - heart touch ?
successive ; and the timely dew of sleep ,
his hand upon the pulses of their thought ;
that snatches scraps of gladness while fate nods ,
plump , soft , and swelling every where ?
und ash breitmann comed oonto it
they fixed old aching eyes ,
whose pastoral passions are made for the grove ;
you know the kind . then let the sun shine on it ! "
his eyes from long sojourning in the night
to those turrets , where the eye
the bison , though he seems so grim ,
though many years on these tall cliffs residing
they have no hearts to hear ;
of eyes that , when by anger stirred ,
wulfhere sought i and wyrmhere :      there war was seldom lacking
neither did the prudent hostess ,
ambrosial forage ; but venus flung herself on to the lap of her
admire them and you love them , and their petals
because the pretty babe does bleed .
by night to be defiled ,
slowly and slowly spreads a speck of green
with unction smooth of salutiferous balms
celia was happier .
moaning on and on , and " where is mary alice ? " it
afoot and light - hearted , i take to the open road ,
drops make a cat a ghost -
reach down a hand , my dear , and take
then hung in air a moment , while
in the land of handsome women .
and being lighted , by the light he spies
undaunted thus defy the main ?
like an aged rock that crumbles ;
and with these haltres thus begon . "
i shall hear that grand amen .
tune , miser , tu , mundus ait , mea fulmina contra
when the ' arf - made recruity goes out to the east
but tell ye 'll stand ahin ' ;
in trees , and plants , and all the flow'ry race ;
its kind attentions to their proper pale ,
their dark and gray , while psyche ever stole
which in that image hail'd a shape celestial .
a fountain - head refreshing -- a clear , perennial spring
o soul , that art essential change ,
oh , gin i were where gadie rins , vol . iv . , 117 .
to my life if you bade me , played my part
and with that fervor and mad zeal
' neath what fourier nicknames , the boreal crown ;
very quietly the red leaves ,
and dried his dropping tresses .
and of a _ wicked contract _ been the scribe .
such hugging and squeezing ! ' twas almost unpleasing ,
for them the host provided / a feast in hospitable way .
an item of inhospitable dust
' fair is the bud his vernal morn brings forth ,
and the swallow shall weave my dreams with threads of flight ,
neglects sir fopling 's call ,
lxiv . " thou privily within the courtyard frame
at these , exclaiming;---“not the gorgon 's hairs
nor ever to know the world at all .
would you have joy in winter - time ,
the shy mountain - bear !
i am alone -- oh be thou near to me ,
_ sakhī : _     now hear me , daughter of a king ,
whatever be his lot ,
when we shall share the spoil . let him beside
back on thy cushions with thy mind 's sense hushed .
protection of this venerable name , gave laws and instructions to
to diurnal revolutions ,
and it 's often a mistake to breathe the air .
but some such system she essayed ,
to loose him at the stables , for he rose
haughty gloom on his handsome face ,
know what i do , am unmoved by men 's blame
thousand books he wrote ?
an indian commonwealth .
you are happy and merry . how then should a jest ever wound you ?
even till my latest day ;
close nestling among the petals rare ,
soon shalt thou with joy be weeping ,
and pilgrim dreams , and little beggar sighs ,
the love of joys our childish years that blest ;
where his pike - bone harp was hidden ,
while we tap on the box to keep time to the playing .
gleam above the sunlight woods ,
with eyes of gold and bramble - dew ,
i hung outside thy gates from early morn ,
who to the wild wood followed me ?
they would n't a ' armed ' i m , but some blooming sniper
y si no vieran salir
read that riddle , scorning pity 's
slain by pelasgian men , that now his quenchèd light deplore .
and [ i]huntington a people proud as they ,
and heaven and all the stable elements
and pressed his thin hand to his withered brow ,
said the sicilian : " while you spoke ,
give me some sign that i may know the truth . "
of days long , long ago ;
enfolded in the air ,
answered : " not so -- for thou shalt come with me !
the grass has quenched my white - rayed gem ,
pray hold me up for fear i swoon ,
and then unto the plains of thessaly
an ’ so i ’m sure to catch it , —
flings himself down upon the reedy grass
( he raises the bed - curtain . )
for the sake of that fair lady he yet would linger there ,
see where they couch together on my bed
gall 's but a faint ingredient .
to stroke the ermine beast
yet shew your comodities , and ye shalbe answerrd
where love holds perpetual feast .
that guard the mossy steps of stone ,
and each fleck on the horse 's flanks
delicacy or effeminacy of complexion , which but for a spice
him speaking thus vaśishṭha stayed ,
others by bacchanalia worn out ,
_ ' mutantem regna cometem . " _
and , as through a translucent cloud
nightly dreams , and thoughts by day ,
whilst i ’m a man , a prince of the creation ,
following , not blowing , drawing not , but drawn ,
and all the puddles freeze ,
could not find a woodland foot - print ,
blessed , blessed ! for she lay
egg - sauce and potatoes do n't spare ,
to deck the banquet .   fiercely flies
and soon on board the lusian pilots leap ,
on board xenodochy to his mind .
and thus he keeps a - wishing ,
whatever the weather , shine or storm ,
with this i close my verses .
“ to move propitiatory with my blood ,
" what , ho , toussaint ! " a moment more ,
“ ill - guarded by th ' unsleeping dragon 's care ?
dear love !
the hare stay'd by the quiet hound .
yet loftier joys the vain pursuit may bring ,
the democrat - eater ,
and even death ; but they would not forsake
daily some words , which you shall have
the heaven - pointing shaft for thee
that in my heart frees wild a bird .
the thought that rose and nightingale are gone ,
sabet no ielas dió vilano .
and yit he tok therof his part .
that cold or hunger , sickness or age ,
the avalanche in his hand ;
will come tame habit , deadly calm , sorrow and gloom .
and climb timavus and her springs explore ,
shedding my song upon height , upon hollow ,
their goal , their glory , was not his ;
come all ! let generous rage your arms employ ,
a sound less soothing than the rustle cool
i of your city am ; and evermore
because he was more fool than knave .
what wife had rafael , or has agnolo ?
be it granted me to behold you again in dying ,
are you errant strands of lady mary 's hair ?
i 'm alone at my casement , for pappy
unto tuonela 's deep river ,
soldier back !
his ship the victory named ;
why have i learned , sayst thou , if thus confined ,
and a joyous whirl ,
that wakens in them god .
boon were those nights of dusted gold
the fame , that honours your illustrious house ,
and on your form and features leave a blight ;
in hope of resurrection to meet with reward ,
to meet his friends the monarch / rode out in mickle glee :
so they hastened their steps , and came to where under the lindens
in anguish had i lain ; and , if alive ,
an could maintain a lady free . "
so , in the throbbing dark , where ebbs the old refrain ,
smoked out of each until he thought he 'd smother .
forelands beacon , belfries call ;
and glassy river and white waterfall ,
like the gatherer of proverbial samphire
who is presumed officially in mexico , _ ib . _
maremma took it from me .   that he knows ,
of martial fare how little we know
and made thy sun the lord of life .
i will throw largesse of broom
who from the fertile plains of tarna came ,
" hither come , ye northland people ,
who sing at their labor on eaves and in thatch--
rise from aquatic to aerial forms .
the wicked steel seized deep in his right side ,
i might be sad .
and that fair plant whose tangled stems
did you ever tell him of your former love affairs ?
rose upwards from his head .
have made you as much wonder at my courtesy ,
i bought her at the stands acacia ,
from fools that crowded youth , nor let thee feel alone .
haste down my way to win .
the beauty which had moved the wide levant ,
" father , " replied telemachus , " you will come to know me by and
even all the misery on him cast
to knowe thilke experience ,
that whan he weneth have an ende ,
and then he 's so pierced with cares ,
and press my glowing face
scarcely at once she dared to rend the mist
of dark - brown gardens , and of peeping flowers ,
a wanton wether had disdain'd the bounds
that fickle heart of thine , my katy !
one thing only
she can not rest , but trembles through and through .
when boastful xerxes lash'd the sestian tide :
dreams of the wild sweet flower of red young lips
let all the passages be spruce ;
i will praise our gracious hostess ,
but when the thing was blazed about the court ,
o lord of pheræ , wilt thou come to woo
sed dabitur iuueni , cui tu , mea summa potestas ,
few green and golden leaves withheld from the storm ,
finished , the road was seared , and blown , and pitted with unequal
of the captive titan - god . i know
why with our wail o'er sad mortality
your little trousers , shirt , and coat--
but worse , much worse , to fight ,
to reach the queen the page hies him fast ,
which fools may scoff at ;
and weariness allow me , then i fear ,
brides , youths unwedded , seniors long with woe
now wait on _ beau _ to his _ alsatia _ ,
for sure ' tis quite beside the mark to think
and ever since the world began it was ordained so ,
her sleeping lord with handmaid lamp attending :
you must still match yourself against me ? thus do your mother 's
themselves with whips and singing pious songs .
my fanny i see in my cane - bottomed chair .
_ far to southward lie the regions
me gord , we 're goin' ' ome ! "
_ her . _ believe it , dearest , there 's not one
when she laughed he frowned upon her ;
for soft is the song my paddle sings .
the peddler 's caravan         william brighty rands
they look'd up to the sky , whose floating glow
lack of true epic hitherto -- tasso ( 1544 - 95 ) the first to give
who give your liberal hearts to me
with wine , he wrought foul deeds in his frenzy , in the
and musing from the busy world apart ,
he whose active thoughts disdain
or t ' totterin ' mak to stan ' .
in the air that our dead things infest
if all the writhing shadow slips ,
dead ! but his sunny and sad land wreathes
and i recognize the voice .
the future by each mark and sign ,
i see thee with the poet on the hills
as , when the dove her rocky hold forsakes ,
then in water proceed to dress it .
nations of foes , array in splendour of pomp ,
sing a song to cheer him up , he wants his dinner too .
against the eternal treachery --
and the water - dogs swam forward ,
more precious than we prize our gold
stretch'd about his feet , labour done , ' twas as you see
ut longo faciles pacis in otio
said , " the baby , my dear , has a tooth . "
alone superior in the field of troy ,
_ alex . _ thus do our priests of heavenly pastures tell ,
the shop could furnish , large and small .
with aching heart , of wrecks that float
chersidamas , beneath the navel thrust ,
purpled over hedge and stone ;
gowpin ' , throbbing .
firm in defence ; as with a wall of brass
get ye hence , ye things of evil ,
comes april 's earliest offering .
and that cynics , white - gloved and cravatted ,
james i.--harris 's hibernica . sir john davies ' tracts .
thus shall your wives , and thus your children fall :
to hold my life , and hold my ears ,
the gift of flowers his hands have sought —
torr'd an ' futherr'd an ' corr'd in a corrt
and by the world be rudely tossed ;
and leather - coated men with slings
guarded with thorns , the modest rose ,
like a staff ,
he besieges the city of quarell for 2 years , and then takes it . ]
simple gurl of tventy - four ,
the flagstones of the street with blood .
you are welcome to my father 's home and mine .
give misers their gold , all the bliss they can know ;
lay bare , through vistas thunder - riven ,
with highest honour all the best
of guarding some monopoly in heaven
and he drained her stiffened limbs with cruel art .
so may our country 's name be undisgraced ,
suddenly , and came out upon our horse ,
specially of werner 's solo ,
and with mysterious reverence i deem )
along the welkin new appearances ,
and one is come who sayeth , " ho ! rajpoots ! soorj is bound ;
and bid them huddle at your back -
when butterflies are on the wing ,
as a happy people come
though patti brown we loud applaud and hail ,
by his own servant washed and blest:-
on to the high floor , where the coffers stood , wherein the
and these , oh prince ! are richly thine .
from here to the endless resting - place ,
and she was there , my hope , my joy ,
breathes round , we care not if the bell be late :
in doubt to deem himself a god , or beast .
i tore the panting chords away ,
so ; -- and fare thee well .
' twas you who did it , you who sat up there
spied her mistake , nor sooner spied than ran
to entertain divine zenocrate ! _ '
yet , such the fury of the mortal race ,
of all they feel may be a part ;
her shelter and her bread .
mingled its pipe about the loadstone caves ;
how far he seems , how far
love is your felicity .
faded to naught , and only did appear
and threaten with ruin dire ;
you are like tragic sunsets , worn were ye
be as thou wouldst be in thine own clear sight ,
taking six of barley - kernels ,
some moody turns he took ;
themselves into the funeral pile , to be burnt with their deceased
king agamemnon assented . so he gave the bronze spear to meriones ,
where all once dear to me ?
in your soulful , speaking eyes -
but there went up a glad hurrah
some vagrant mood in me concealed or glossed ,
and scorched by the sun her haggard brow ,
he heard the click of locks ,
nae burnie 's waterfa ' ,
and sometimes fall a - weeping ,
but now the scene is white ,
scratching all the tables and marring all the chairs ,
the " companions of the right hand " ( ah ! how joyful they will be ! )
that the god of the universe cares for me ?
i carry off a piece of you
the lash and reins , and from his seat down leap'd
him that had loved her once , the cavalier ,
de pace stabilienda
he tears the spirits , flays them , and their limbs
and the moon hid behind a tawny mask
when balmy sweetness fills the air ,
to link two happy names in one —
entrance , is studded with minute honey glands , and is called the
but fairer never touch'd a heart
knowing me for a friend , who loves the road ,
and held him to his aged breast .
but i beheld upon the grass four horses , snowy white ,
as she neared the woodland border ,
base fear becomes the guilty , not the free ;
and man that 's mazed among the three . "
if i had n't turned for healing
spice of desire , "
a lofty tower the shadows have not hid
it 's reef and furl , and haul the line ,
( arrived , because not all the bridge could gain )
burns to his bones ; he starting fell , stiff twists
a song of sweetness and gladness untold ,
the lion differing from the snake
he falls by sin and woe disgraced . ”
from the surrounding forest hewed ,
and that , for many days , he came not back ,
to eat a candy cat !
for as i sailed upon that pictured tide
to blend th ' enfevering draught with its pellucid waves .
we hae tales to tell ,
that the deacon finished the one - hoss - shay .
that i , like my heart , had died .
the sudden war , that from the deed ensued ,
clothing with a robe of silver
all - heal and willow - herb and meadow - sweet ,
hand . she evidently preferred that they should go direct to their
till the longing is less and the good gone
and my good husband 's so belov'd ,
palled all its length in blackest samite , lay .
and memnon his ; and swiftly in fiery fight
daughter of the ancient king , who changed her form
occurs in the latter version for _ þa vðen _ of the older copy .
his well - meant flatteries oft are blind affronts ,
mit nackenden armen und triefenden stirnen ,
with downcast eyes , and modest grace ;
young prince to elder crown ;
against an inward - opening door
than the right to repair in the future the wrong
shall be yours , and your heart shall rejoice ,
i felt too happy and too shy to meet
while the friar must choose
i feel the icy breath of sorrow
for liberal minds with candour ever see
half of which were buried by the mohammedans at maghar , and half
" he is very nice reading in summer , but inter
comforting . "
substance that nature and the human join'd .
tripods that have never yet been on the fire , and ten talents of
and to their score of questions i replied ,
uncurled it hangs , the fatal shears demands ,
its silver cherubs smiling as they heard,--
but more resistless far th ' idalian queen--
a voice -- o , the music that swells on the air
as a discomfited and helpless man ;
empty and idle , when evening sun
and , lovers ' sonnets turn'd to holy psalms ,
gives strength , though fathom him none may ;
the old birds have flown
a female , and a child is in her arms ;
she calls -- to soothe in calm , awhile
the scandal cleave .
with rapid flight she reach'd the grecian ships .
make man the poor base slave of low design ,
when it points its finger southward along the
though i sob , " your stay was long !
with tongue as bold as eyes , petition made ,
although i find not promptitude of thought
ran all in haste to see that silver brood
thomas a tat - ta - mus took two t 's
hence jarring sectaries may learn
in such a quick close envelope
" to the third it may likewise be objected that it is drawn from
promised , if promise were required , to do
to show such favour unto me ,
de driver blow his horn !
his chestnut whistle and his shingle cart ,
as his inferior flame
were dearer to me than bread .
their stay and dwelling place !
servia 's grey old hospodar ,
one shelter where our spirits fain would be ,
that promis'd straight the ladies , and ready all things made .
by life - corroding care .
sung in the romes of ruined spheres ,
to the pure fount of god -- and is athirst
' tis the land of deep shadow , of sunshine , and shower ,
corpus , et ipsum animum spe finis dura ferentem ,
from a rock of the ocean that beauty is borne--
he wills less than he can ,
it ceased , and then it came again ,
no touch of balm - beat winds from torrid seas
all of his family , frolicsome , naughty .
so sigurd turned to the river and stood by the wave - wet strand ,
receive you , as ye tell ( upon my page
no chirp of any bird ,
and destroy the tree so baneful ,
the fever gleam
from place the peerless pierre van wyck ?
and ugliness , and that earth 's ecstasy
grew beyond their expectations ,
so you went to the park with biscuits
and panted , self - pursued . but evermore
thither she went , an old man there she found ,
time past . whoso wish to woo a good lady and the daughter
heart and brain ! no more be twain ;
cock robin said : " my little dears ,
one to her bosom - friend she throws ;
but the day after next , if my charmer is willing ,
then his own chamber sought , and rack'd his breast
fell the night - rovers on the plain ,
he was born upon the coal - mount ,
we may not enter without rage . "   yet more
of a child of plutarch and shakespeare .
" you are the wisest man that ever was ,
do n't waste your pity on those who croak ! "
fight them , thou our prince , jove 's son sarpedon , is slain . jove
alas ! dear one , it seems
alone , unknown , she would the danger face ,
by supplication mov'd and holy love )
farewell to the straths and green valleys below :
forebears , ancestors .
by swift engulfments of incalculable tides
back , " " curbing , " " restraining , " but i can not think that the
and harmony of diverse race :
_ page _ 96 . " our country - swains in the morris - dance . "--in morley 's
peaceful world , you great mousetrap ,
though moving inly to one far - set goal.--
fathers ! and britons ! whence this alien band
when the watches were long ,
tho ' light they be , this heart of mine
he sees the hour of action fly , —
to sigh for ribbons if thou art so silly ,
not permanent -- and so had wasted
found plenteous wealth on britain 's shore .
sharply i pass the terse orders down .
the heart of the she - wolf ?   who was thy parent ,
as generous as one could wish to see ,
for drede and lefte his oghne hous :
with holy fire i 'll scorch and sting thee !
  baron geramb , the rival of his r. h. in whiskers .
greeted their safe escape to me .
hark ! a spontaneous strain
the shadow of the rains has covered the day from end to end .
smoothed and formed it into peace - pipes ,
at the fetching o ’ johnny away .
and ev'ry record he could trace ,
loved one , without thee , what then would all feast be ?
ah ! blessed future never snatch her thence ,
when voiceless things have found a tone
the man which is malicious
intoxicates the sense . "
that bolts of thunder have shattered ,
colossal creature of a sculptor 's brain ,
where the scarlet cressets hang over the trembling pool :
robins carry parasols ;
keep mourning watch with us . this is the hour
this is the portrait ; and i take
my dere herte laugh , and yonder pleye
" ten leagues from this a man there is ,
there are valleys unpeopled and still ;
" the roads should blossom , the roads should bloom ,
to her pelides:—"with regardful ear ,
doth willingly fall twice ,
no appeal to death ;
he heard the cry of suffering and disease ,
nought else .   the fisher , sick at heart , kneels down ;
allow that the dorg which you 've got is the best ;
and with hasty steps went onward ,
and bid him seek the grecian ships , and there
king estmere , and in the romances .
i bring my bowls of milk , and seasoned roots ,
and his peers went mourning all the way .
this man whose homely face you look upon ,
whate'er that was , rolled by , deterred no whit .
what does bounteous summer bring ?
nay , married dames will now and then discover
the seasoned warrior , old and full of scars ,
ah ! fatal meeting to thy troops and thee ,
thenceforward at each step i felt the wings
but northward sped the little _ golden hynde _ ,
i splendid in my suit of black ,
i have y - nowe , if he ther - after sende ! '
he 's so high - bred and lordly - like
like the last glimmer of faith among mankind ,
far in the stillness a cat
immortal is her mind ;
do n't you think him generous , noble , unselfish , heroic ?
seized his grandmother , and threw her
and that thy will be done ;
trained to the chase , his eagle eye
finguntur species , ut nec pes , nec caput uni
so full of claret , that whoso pricks this vine
only upon prince david 's men one gleam
no sword hangs by my side , no god will turn
and the mud churned up in it turbidly .
white - crested like the lord of snows
it might defy the stoutest in his prime
all the vain tumults of the mind and mart .
a crooked trail as all calves do .
up and down those selfsame stairs ,
i thrill'd with the power 's pulsations , and the charm of my theme
amerian for the bending vine prepare .
and framed their iron creeds to shut thee out .
i went where i was more than guest .
but listens where the echoes
to break , not wield , the scourge wet with their
but thou art ever hasty in thy speech ,
of such fair guests come thither ; before the king they stood ,
about the patient headland 's knees
the nipping weather , he affirmed ,
if we were things born
and those who own the charms i had will
gifts for girls , and gifts for boys ,
of each his faction , in thir several clanns ,
struggled and scuffled in the dark ,
paraunter , in his briddes wyse , a lay
with youth 's gold and white and red ;
doth hurt his fruit , or him can move :
a hundred - headed golden shock .
preacher was never more
in the water - butt his boat
half inwardly , half audibly she spoke ,
the fateful lock ! her wicked prize possess'd ,
" of all that is pernicious in admiration , the
i will make you brooches and toys for your delight
and shining creeks where the golden grass
a tuscan prince , and by his regal crown ;
if but a momentary shower descend !
wilt thou receive his parting breath ?
until the day i die . _
for all our gazing ; but the soul ,
hath never been a child .
expressions of his vision and his love ; and it is by these , not
" pour we to ocean . " ocean , sire of all ,
or twelve , or , till enquiry made , she learn
her meekly - suffer'd woes ;
by the cutting of canals and the raising of
and dream that i should carry
where on the mount he watched his sorceries dark and dread .
how fade the lines of caste and birth !
haste , busk , and boune , and seat thee !
i know his heart has beat to bright
the noble gifts for him designed .
shine bright , when thou art gone ; as thou shalt tell ,
here in my breast !
for iron -- cold iron -- is master of men all . '
scarcity of grain in wet seasons
i hobble after , many a day ;
through rarefied air that maddens the pulses ,
by their proposals ev'ry day ,
" my own , hereafter , and for ever ?
as , through the flowery mazes sweet ,
says i , ' it is wild roses
at noon we went upon the lake ,
" shut out the flower - time ,
come unto us ; for we , unless it come ,
for weakness can the prince no further hie ,
the torpid touch of his glazing breath , and ring to the
such as may strike thy successor with dread !
" yet soe yt is , i must haue fresher ware ;
or did the kentish plumtree faint to note
through all my points i swing --
by every godlike sense
sae took his leave without a sigh ;
while melting airs are heard ,
for all our good is in that primal good
haunting them like a presence . even now
on donne a boire et a manger ici ;
wind to the quiet lake !
through all the sorrows of eternal change ,
will be glad to keep clear of , ane andrew agnew .
in like manner it may be presumed that our speaker has
lit up my heart , and brightened my dull room .
' i 've felt them both , by turns:--but as they pass'd ,
to the irish bar ' ( note to second edition ) . ' burke , ' says bolton
then all the people made reply ,
since all those dreams led straight to you .
do n't lose courage ! spirit brave , 105 .
she had her speech thus unloosed , she began to sing , so that with
fell the daylight 's fading glimmer
that it lay on .   the name was--
there , too , was caesar 's all - protecting arm ;
your hair it lifted , your lips it sought ,
¡ adiós ! ... impera en tanto desdeñoso
are all , my beloved , of thee .
the phrases like a psalm : a line that reads-
gives sponge - cake , a few " kisses " or so ,
rutilam ferox torosa ceruice quate iubam . '
is shining in the sky .
whose feet so little while ago
extinct be every hum ,
all at rest were seen .
for he left his pretty boy ,
vexing the void abyss with prayer .
de lightning - bug de flame ;
still is he here !
but i wanted to git away ' fore i proved it .
where numbers crave their sustenance in words .
he was to travel ; and though inez grieved
the father and the brothers three :
  the ms . goes on thus :
never until this moment have we met
they gathered round with breathing hushed
which fills my heart for you and nursed them with it ;
the trees are like dark lovers who dream in starlight ,
but after you 've grasp'd it , there follows a sting !
already rising was , but from low people ;
three days , three nights ,
" thou wavering , witless soul ,
like your charms , are unequalled . _
on the lake 's extended surface ,
riddle we may not unravel ,
a warrior worthy to be hector ’s foe . "
scared momently
of secret beauty the thickets clustered sweet :
of the features tender yet strong , --
whilst all the gall from your wild<90.7 > ink you drain ,
they on before me went ; i sole pursued ,
on the commerce of gosh , on its morals and trade ;
ancestors of our race , and the veda is the oldest book we have in
for such knowledge ?   away ! "
from shame and menace free in years to come--
and thy head on its pillow of dust be laid ;
this is the present that i will make him . '
" tell me , who may her sewer be ?
as she was ; just , without a slur ;
sternat et aduersos marte fauente duces ,
white gulls wor wheelin ' roun ' the sky
" do you mean --
with shield and blade horatius
for which pandare mighte not restreyne
you are a seed for the sky there to teach
so never may those maddening scenes
it works up war like a navy yard .
we have not bound your feet with our entreating arms .
trojans . he has killed many a brave man -- unless indeed he is some
is a lily kissed . "
and cursed brood ! your wit and will are born
manner so much superior to all mean solicitation , that pope was
and in low accents faint and weak
of this deed undone , if i fail herein ;
the nameless charm about all things hath died ,
preaching the form of an ardent personal devotion to the god
when they arrive before the ruinous sweep ,
she gave the counts of handsome mien
voracity thus as an integer stands
heard speak on the ground of his connection with the public press
god 's kingdom to establish on the earth ! '
my soule to true salvation guiding .
that i may cheat the helmsman of his fear :
shines heaven 's divinest grace .
pray tell me of that host
i heard in that same instant , when for thee
and this is hell -- and in this smother
and pledged me to the pathway of her sect .
above the darkness of the apennines ,
the look of his dainty - nosing , red
toward flickering radiances , that slip
americans ! would you conspire
the cow jumped over the moon ;
jayadev , the bard of love ,
he stayed not for brake , and he stopped not for stone ;
in splendour : what strength was , that would not bend
noon burned on the wave , and that shadowy shore
to gnash my gums , to weep and wail ,
to a gorge below , but i breathed a prayer ,
when i was twenty and odd years old .
to - day , before death 's angel over - lean
oh , dreamy - eyed child !
and boasts that elenor murray was all his ?
that he may be honoured and justly famed . "
whither so light of garb and swift of foot , o huntress ?
on earth the dearest , sweetest spot ,
her whole life bent to this one deed ,
fields beneath a quilt of snow
the pleasure i took in these scenes at the time ,
with their tear drops , shed in sorrow ,
in thy created storm .
as drifts the mist on jakko hill .
teucrians and latins : so he saith , and calls the gods to aid .
shakes the sacred lodge with terror ,
of unreflecting love -- then on the shore
on which this letter chiefly _ hinges _ ;)
so the two kings who spain and afric lead ,
" iron brought me to manala ,
where each chaste soul
to such a miracle of charms allied :
having ordered some soles for his dinner ,
ah ! how can those fair eyes endure
serenest skies continually
the knights passed through the castle 's largest gate ,
" what makes the oak - tree grow
which they wore .
come to my arms and to my heart once more ;
freewill restores the father to the skies ,
but yet , o l -- d ! confess i must ,
frae far , outlandish pairts i came .
by oracular inspiration ,
but as ill tidings will their truth assure
ther was with him non other fare
macrob . vi . 1 : " hastati spargunt hastas , fit ferreus imber . " see
strengthen myself with new allies ,
should i be so complacent in my skill
my rose , so like a tender mouth it is :
ah ! who can paint that first great awful night ,
" my love for you is deep !
for summer 's song is in my heart ,
his flag at furl , portmanteaued ; drains to the dregs
drinking in a moment like this ?
like the best diplomatist .
is this , pray , like the wives of barrins ,
" i am his wife , " said the dame .
and thy gates , jerusholayim .
and lights and calls and silver din ,
and how ful graunted was , by oon assent ,
" but he does n't want to go -- and wo n't go , "
come out ! " they all did cry ;
with ribbon , wreath , and coloured vest ,
could strike me half so forcibly as this .
gradually losing ' _ in due course _ ' ?
and its diffused fire gone round the veins ,
he would fetch praise and glorious conquest bring .
by turns they visit this ethereal sky ,
then feed the chicken , ducks and geese ,
" even so , " the woman said,"was mine . "
author 's feelings than his taste . the mechanical part , with
the news that flies like fire from tongue to tongue
could well by any force o'ermastered be .
and i kept on thinkin ' , thinkin ' , as the bullets faster flew ,
so soon the pretty emerald green was coated
that lied not with the lips .
the victor never conquered yet ,
here in orcus far from strife ,
now we 're alane in the green - wood sae bonnie--
by goddes fay , by goddes fay !
v. 57 .   thus up the shrinking paper . ]
himself my gentle master turn'd me round ,
and more illustrious were the steeds which bore
" the pride of the palace , the bower and the hall ,
he spake , nor his request the towering son
to offer gifts of coin and kind ;
in caverns of a hill asleep .
dares not invade the guarded nest .
a silver goblet of six measures ; earth
eldah thompson got so tickled dat he lak to los ' his grace ,
give the news a passage free .
at an upper window .   and i at last went out ;
the stones are mute . the stones could only say ,
perchance his boast of lucrece ' sovereignty
i am not wise to know ,
and sorrow in the twitter of the swallers ' round the shed ;
the immortal deeds of heroes and of kings .
answers rollanz : " the culvert is bested .
to the gods of fear that they worship . leave them there ,
within the dancing maid the roots of woe .
and be the only blackbird in the dish .
the sun might sink in a storm cloud 's frown
why should you rack , poor , foolish bards ,
i hate the smiddy 's lowe ,
and determined enemy of italian independence .
lust entering here :
poet was most pleased with a bunch of violets picked from the
and others claws , from their ceaseless efforts to procure
bearing no idle message for thine ears .
but in life had _ never _ known
i do n't know how to tell it -- but ef sich a thing could be
though his writing were good ,
at last the trial had an end ,
to the sky the flame rose upward ,
then began his wondrous singing .
but long and vain unto him seemed the way
courage is n't a brilliant dash ,
where’er his ponderous flag was reared ;
and an echo or two of the songs i knew
big with the birth of stars , and when he spake
o ferns in the dusk !
that night sleep dropped not from the dreary skies ,
so fired with rage , the trojans ' scanty train
" i can not rise , my darling ,
how little lovely here ? how little known ?
" and here or there we lightly flick the ball ,
hence to make the rolls for spinning ,
old jemmy 's come again .
with eyes that light the tawny face
pasture they spring in , some in clumps too close
the ache in my heart 's core , the hope i dare not name--
made spheral music round his haloed head .
through the doorway and hastily fled ,
i more than once have heard at night
on the launching of the independence , iii . 374 ;
where we read the fearful story--
_ as the fluting of a bird , _
for errors multiplied and infinite ,
with that the hond of hevene him smot
their life 's strength ; others , clutching in their hands
the knightly caesar of the christian north .
you , tityrus , entertain your sylvan muse .
upon the funeral pyre , i 'd throw
and drop it softly on the earth and say :
whyles , ranging like a roaring lion ,
whose flowing hair
he stakes his quiver , bow and arrows ,
wherefore about him weeping sore were gathered all the men ,
nin de celebrar en grande aparato ,
perfect are ;
they plunge their prows , and dive , and spring again :
amidst yon revellers a sudden guest
rebellion rising , saw in whom , how spred
what is right and what is wrang , by the law ?
no tinsel yours , be yours all native gold ,
as he sat up on end , on his little cock - tail .
all his moody melancholy ;
the lond was torned up so doun :
  the heaven of the fixed stars .
and let that pine to aggravate thy store ;
long years ago , it might befall ,
unto myself that walk the street
that still her heart 's deep sorrow she harbors fierce and fell ;
et venere et cenis et pluma sardanapali .
comrades and hunters tried
and fertile , which that cloister once was us'd
the man replied : " of reptile race
take up the lesson , o my heart ;
amid the pathless pyrenees ,
but all have foully sped ;
as ever by our fathers we were told .
the straggling fragments of some seven courts ,
erring ; for he with this rebellious rout
but over the scud and the palm - trees an english flag was flown .
now to the sister hills that skirt her plain ,
devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore ,
how can i then return in happy plight ,
and in a corner find the toys
he looks and laughs at a ' that .
then perseus;--“thus if true i speak , or no ,
which his parents had constructed . "
of knowledge in this eden of the west ,
reluctance , lose . 15 . quin age : _ why not go on ? _ in ironical
to wish to be a man !
it is an honour to the destined given ,
prison in the castle of st . andrews , after philiphaugh .   a lord
and daylie doth her changefull counsels bend
and bickerings of serving - men
gave one quick spring and reached a firmer part .
our glad surprise , proposed we follow it .
ere in his breast ' tis born :
' n ' to sleep without dreamin ' when
on gray beth - peor 's height ,
thurgh fyr , which that men putten under .
to make the edges straight .
as they were captives to the king of flowers ;
and a star in the story of man !
the last light of his worship too !
for rávaṇ bore thee through the sky ,
with grief and rage the mother - lion stung .
the air , such pleasure loth to lose ,
the blue of the unfathomed sea ,
my seared and blighted name , how would it tally
if he had been acuter .
what are the bounds of no man 's land ?
o fairest form the world can show !
i am not as was hercules the stout ,
our king did to himself allot ,
yet there 's few but would suffer the sough
this morning , for a little , the old grief came back ,
i fall upon the thorns of life ! i bleed !
cry from the dust - stopped lips of all their sages,--
now the bright day - god turned his burning ray
clothed in white samite , mystic , wonderful .
all towards bethl'em walk ,
and deep , unuttered sadness in the world .
that from day to day you dread ;
constrain'd , the choicest beeves i thence import ,
the green foam - whitened wave wax red
an ' cut you up wi ' ready sleight ,
" comely and fair and gentle of aspect , "
i mean to cut them down to four .
' flight of stairs , ' thy stranger brother ,
and shield to shield close - serried , they sustain
thy workes for wealth , and life for gold engage .
three hundred living souls we were :
this last dear fancy slay ! "
the chap that daresent go a yard
dim in the east there burns a new - born sun ,
illustrious , spreading o'er a barbarous world
anticipation forward points the view .
mi thought wol entermette him sone .
so are you to my thoughts as food to life ,
and gave to solitude a friend . '
to our good parish , yet must they fulfil
enfold me in thy care .
" the great god sighed for the cost and the pain . "
it robs pretty maids of their heart 's delight--
this ladi , which was innocent
stumble down the path
that all his lynage rue sore for his offence .
oblivion in a hated brewage found !
and wisdom insupportably complete ,
her burning cheeks upon .
through the shady trees ' high summits ,
nam mea quid poterunt ossa minuta loqui ?
shall thus and then
" _ fures dextra coercet ,
the swift white feet are flown !
dost thou transgress his prudent rule ,
of his own city and his babes before
after much consultation a little white vest was chosen -- the elder
from home thrust out , together — everywhere .
and shook her rag one until it cried .
and often times then it is good for nought .
and solemnly swells saint leonard 's chime
may not withdraw her gaze : breathless she waits .
to the mighty stream of ruin
that foolish , selfish , faithless ways
the distant lighthouse hears , and with his flaming signal
but when or how i can not tell :
so , when the dying sunset gleams
and we clomb up and saw , and shouted strong
on thee ligs way .
thy fame for truth unsmirched with stain ?
seven hundred years have well - nigh passed away ;
forever , from our shore .
wholesome and spacious ,
to greater deeds no man can win " ...
fer calathis uiolam et nigro permixta ligustro
was in some quiet breast
within the burning tropics cold ;
as a sun - dial ; but am like a clock ,
and think when they 're making their wills they are dying ;
and has no where to lay his head ,
and the waste solitudes of night inhabit
pure fount , that , welling from this wooded hill ,
" te whit !   te whoo ! "
whose marvellous life deservedly were sung
and hear no more at all .
with an eternal glory -- which , if made
captive ! is there a hell to him like this ?
charioteer of idomeneus . ]
from what in heaven of him i heard .   speed now ,
wiv a lalldabber(6 ) ower their heead ,
on sait que tu dois ressusciter le troisième
he paus'd;--then round his eyes and arms he threw
& now we wil depart . and welth & helth goth out .
the song of winter ,
ancient temple and oracle of apollo .
drinking to drown it all .
and death ’s and life ’s dim sunlit mist
times were bad -- in germany
send through the hush of dawn a glad good - bye .
no rougher brakes or matted worse are found
i long to eat that potted beef -- to taste that apple - pie ;
from putting hobbles on the leaping ship ,
but , bein ' aussies -- spare me days!--
therwith out stept a foggy three - chinnd dame ,
and still the wind grew , still the clipper strode ,
always you stand in radiant guise ,
of all memorial bare ,
is laid on all cargo
belinda blonde was a beautiful doll ,
at the dawning of the morning ,
whate'er might be his wishes , each could not but confess ,
now hates him more then any tongue can tell .
like music heard once by an ear
the queen was in the kitchen
a million flush'd embattled conquerors wait ,
a king in his own country
came the emir 's gentle lady ,
to talking put a stop .
þy heued hatȝ nauþer greme ne gryste ,
that all this grate is rusty with my tears ?
" solum , " the ground .
and fatted sheep and sable oxen slay ;
den : " how de news git roun dem posts ? "
and while the game he chases , while he seeks
ere they have tried their force to wound ;
to cure the scab of the nation ,
o forty miles off aberdeen ,
the bloom of water , tender blue ,
at thy festival ;
rose ardoise , tu grimpes et tu fleuris autour des
and if the rosemary branch should decay ,
when forth we squeeze it , in chewing up our food,--
and she went upon her wanderings ,
a benefactor 's .
conquest alone can ratify the name--
and then to feel that all that ' round us lies
in fairest light , each borrow'd grace ,
and is to be courted and trusted when met ,
oh gallant was the long array !
knock - down -- a ceremony insisted upon by ladies who decline
of april and hunt violets ; when the rain
can i with drugs not dull the ache one night ?
kitty wants to write ! at the social settlement
betokening me such ill .   onward he mov'd ,
this fond , self - sanction'd , wilful zest ,
and on the upraised hand of it
she veils the torrent of her tearful eyes ;
as i came through the garden gate ?
and india to his temple brought ,
had wrought ten angel - orders in whom he trusted well , that they
the golden bowls with sparkling wine are crown'd ,
underneath that hillside tree
_ deus est deus pauperum _ .
all sheath'd in glittering panoply ;
she led him out along the tide ,
what priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
shall feign indifference , or affect disdain,--
so he with sweeter eloquence than flows
oh ! mary was modest , an ' pure as the lily ,
and shall the palm - tree fear ?
so polished and smooth that i mirrored myself in it as i appear .
one little moment ere we pass
and lasting thankfulness ,
enchanters , dwarfs and elves ,
by trumpets sound , to summon them to yeeld ,
' now drain to the dregs your last tankard ,
and i lit the lamp in my room ,
dreams of towns vermillion - gated
and none with him could share it ;
in the green , rippled twilight .   death has smote
their old embrace , and as their bodies met ,
then follow his brilliant example ,
denies thee long to live : nor shalt thou rest ,
my grandmother , mopsy , was drown'd in a well ;
but such a solid will is all too rare .
thus had ended all the mourning . "
mine is a harp which pleasure , love ,
next burn ucalegon 's , and far and wide
then shining soft on tender love 's delight.--
there is a low moan , as of dying men ,
caricatures , for a number of them were exhibited at the
of hope and joy for thee .
if i lets yer go away ,
where a fierce fire burns the hearts of men --
mine eyes the strait , the roomy cave , my mind ;
and i that made like music in my youth
this noble dane - hall , till now to thee .
switch , bang , rat , puff -- odzooks , man ! i know not
we know that when she comes
see them , monuments of woe .
we see the new - born crescent in the blue ;
luz , peñascos , torrentes y cascadas ,
and does he for his fond - eyed olive look ,
that rears his head , and claps him with his wings ,
if any be , of tasting this fair fruit ,
time here can never close .
flame and shot may rive the fortress walls apart ,
signature : " ich umarme dich , bis dir die rippen krachen . dein
of look or thought . always to choose between
( although the waves be wild and angry still )
by the window of my sister ,
towards immensity immensely rearing .
to pluck at any flying love ,
came behind his back ,
which gazes out at me
riding neer her highest noon ,
blow over me -- i am so tired , so tired
still , mighty season , do i see't ,
dum stupentibus tenebris candidum praestat diem ,
and build the dome that shall not fall . ' "
where is abraham and all his progeny
quietly first that you may not meet with him in the day of his
now shall i have my londe agayne ,
the wind , in fact , perhaps was rather less ,
and martial music cleaves the sky .
i should like to imagine
grave these maxims on thy soul .
lxxv . " be near us now , and o , vouchsafe thine aid ,
i dislik'd but even now ;
in curled entanglements ; and then all closes
mosque and gleaming water - tower hazy in a fountain 's jet
founde was great aristotyl at the conclusion
a mastiff , stranger there , with ire
that does not amount to much .
after a day , or two , or three ,
into the beautiful eyes , wherewith love made the cord to ensnare
taught him how to kill every kind of wild creature that is bred
the plans of science with the works of art ;
and contend in time of snowfall .
are but unwrought material
was this one space better then all beside ,
was also in three columns , with a thirst
et quot creta tulit uetus et quot achaia formas ,
there 's nae covenant noo , lassie , vol . ii . , 187 .
to deck my mother 's bour and mine .
to which the finest , purest , silver thread
when they ask'd , " does it trot ? " he said , " certainly not !
powerful ) , that the president of the republic should be
long enough to sing thy praise .
but ryght that he had done .
whom she tends with that kindness all invalids want ,
he took the tide of fortune at the flood ;
and heptarchy patriotisms must follow .
from the tost brands that round them fly ,
lo , he maketh all things new .
my breath of life , where art thou ? high above ,
and riding far away .
he sleeps in the place of the name
and said : " pretty rose , your playtime is o'er . "
we 'd tramp the world on sunny days , both light of heart and mind ,
after the king , who eat in arthur 's halls .
for in the compact between god and him ,
where , all the long and lone daylight ,
unintentionally caused his death , or else a tunic smeared on the
and dread of endless doom ,
" for though your foe had hands , like hector strong ,
nought that it can bestow .
rose up in wrath and fear ,
his joints at each stir made a crack , and the cur
a handful of red sand , from the hot clime
and asks for blessings from the lord ,
there was displayed no animosity ,
in her anguish died deserted
train de man all roun ' ;
con remos hieren y espumas alzan ,
stood at her feet . " i pr'ythee , leopard , sing ;
" craigdarroch , thou'lt soar when creation shall sink ;
concise , unfaltering , sweet and clear ,
zeus and the goddess pitying , i knew
unto such songs , when in her orisons
for they starve the little frightened child
cynthia prima suis miserum me cepit ocellis ,
and singing startle the dull night ,
what though that silver in your hair
with too much readiness . but high he flaunted
" but is his love for her so small
and every time they made a shot , he cried " ai n't that a beaut ! "
many , who there had heard him , and bore him mortal hate ,
passed through the centuries , gathering from learned and
william was his given name ;
do n't let the master meet you ;
the tearful trust , the smiling wrong ,
and not a proper treasure - trove .
compare aristotle , ethic .   nic . l. vi .   c. 13 .   [ greek here ]
+ the story+ told in the ballad is a piece of history , and belongs
` loraine , and other verses ' ( melbourne , 1898 ) .
he fought with all the thirty till all but one were slain ;
" i counsel thee against it , " / hagen then replied ,
to blind a man till he be glad ,
so we better be gwine on ,
“ where shall i seek thee , icarus?”--he said ,
in the deepest slumber sunken . "
odysseus might come again to his own country ; soon would he
and he before his cottage door
shove off from the wharf - edge ! steady !
for grecian girls and men ;
in their own lands , like adam in the east,--
v. 92 .   venerable plumes . ]   the same metaphor has occurred in
_ at pater æneas , audito nomine turni ,
night and day their steps sound by my door .
where the flesh is torn asunder ,
with burning eyes , gaunt with the glow of hell ?
they tell thee , in their dreaming school ,
i think we 'll ca ' him robin
and the grapes in purple clusters .
great is my guilt , but greater
i like the lasses -- gude forgie me !
as of god 's wrath on the unclean cities , fell
  " here is a large pagoda by a tank , on the water of which float
lies like a rod of rippled jade .
and , when a smile half - closed their light ,
at a pleasant evening party i had taken down to supper
flushing with anger
good!--said the padre,--believe me still ,
a somewhat higher song , of that loud tone ,
came next on his stringhalty grey ,
of the true - hearted and the unshackled gone ?
the sacred palms thou bearest to the sky !
the wild geranium holds its dew
the gale ,
a power is gone which nothing can restore ,
" who hath conducted , or with lantern sure
but reaching him , who gave her wings to fly .
come and behold thy rome , that is lamenting ,
a little while i still would linger here .
table - flesh of priests neglect too ,
then kilmeny begg'd again to see
--but of the poor man ask , the abject poor ,
few tones the slender rillet has has--
little boy , when you go
so when my temple is fallen
antiphates ; he , backward , fell to earth .
had shrinking stood like flowers beneath
weeping to him , who willingly doth pardon .
saying to them , " o my children ,
is needful , i have here a ring she gave me .
en she wrap 'em , fo'th en back ,
the loving word for him .
and haughty sky , fall down !
now the hero , wainamoinen ,
or sun - bright hall of power ,
but in the papers read his little speech ,
on my fingers every bank , every shallow , every swell
and force by ten the spendthrift to retire ;
and , heaven being rolled between us at the end ,
" at least may god work with you in this to do us right .
upon loving -- and that means
sprung at his very birth ,
when one saith " ' tisunpleasing ! " this is null !
lest journeying remote to the abode
dorothy gray to her son thomas gray . " [ cunningham 's edit . of
along the mazy current . low the woods
to merrier purpose , down the seething streets ,
and mix'd with the mirthful and gay ,
she whom thou lov'st perchance , as i love thee,--
but laws of nature were our scorn ;
we fall , like icarus , to rise no more .
are fopperies , which only tend
repelled the hostile gleam ,
' tis the last judgment 's fire must cure this place ,
and took the daughter of the vine to spouse .
still remembered in the murmur
he had been taught to look honesty
suspicious , reasonless . why should thir lord
one night in his white bed ,
deep in baby mary 's eyes ,
tore at my bosom and maddened my brain .
there was room to surmise that his senses were hurt ,
and christe receive thye saule .
but when the mother 's watchful eyes are shrouded
just like lemon peel .
he found a crooked sixpence
but , know that you do not inherit
rest in luxurious fetters .
that fell from the priest 's lifted hand .
thou , who did sit on jacob 's well
just to show him how unsafe it was to blubber ,
the guest - hall 's half - open door ;
of life , when , eager , hoping for the palm ,
but , as he took
each day , when the glow of sunset
come here , sir samuel , where 's his health
o'er the nun 's breast that flower of beauty bow'd .
that he would cut the tedious matter short ,
and take true love with me !
the favour of the goddess wou'd engage ;
and didst escape with life ; but thou hast found
that calls him to his meals !
scarce worthy notice , hopeless to withstand
and the valkyries crown'd their horns with mead .
a rival of its fellow ;
hae sunt , quas merito quondam est mirata uetustas ;
faithful in thy mission prove ,
nine - tenths of all we see
bud assomivver thay arrived
something akin , methinks , to abraham ,
called a waiter and ordered a cup of hot milk ,
feel no more the slightest suffering ,
_ krishna : _   the sun is in the east , the tide of night has ebbed ,
yet , comrade old , can bitterer knowledge be
of that sin into which i now must fall ,
" here _ for their crimes _ ( _ perhaps _ ) in ages fled ,
with valor 's fever at the sound .
and fattening food derives , or that the fire
our thoughts off one another more ,
thy skill to poet were , thou scorner of the ground !
upon the danube 's left branch and left bank ,
down to the lowest depths , to lave :
there kneels a goodly pair ;
busy metropolis in which he lived , seemed least
far from the land , and lost .
' tis war , red war , i 'll give you then ,
one weak frog only in the thaw
clement after a shorter time affords an indication that this
he looks , too , from a place so high ,
of the green wood 's array ;
taste life 's , & c.
while her heart longs in secret to know how sin seems .
and freshness of her youth ,
patience in want , and poverty of mind ,              }
i am most difficult to find .
that it an heven was hir voys to here . --
then from behind the scene the monster stept ,
fortune learn to seize alone ,
on whose sole arm hung victory .
with much of elemental strife and din ,
my senses down , when the true path i left ,
when he requires a stroll ;
but my eyes were suddenly afraid .
huge masses lie of rugged stone
and all the grounds and the orchards about
half a score of years i 've loved her--
an erring lace , which here and there
him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which it fits . it will
such wisdom pan inspires .
to keep themselves from goin' tew
hated , as their age increases ,
from dewy evening 's purest sky ,
you that have dared to break our bound , and gulled
after the seas are all cross'd , ( as they seem already cross'd , )
were all now here from west and east
can you guess ?
of strife and toil and fruitless energy !
in the gay woods and in the golden air ,
all that my wishing would ,
forget the moment ere the moment slips ,
when a ' the hills are cover'd wi ' snaw ,
but who cares to peer back of beauty 's fair screen
rose near their own;--and solemn is the call;--
far from thee , in life 's turmoils nought i see
diamond stars of morning dew :
which goes to show that old nature 's plans
think you , what noble conquests might be ours ,
maun follow the carl ,
such was the tale he told of avallon ,
like some tall hill of glistering gold ,
since ev'ry hour and moment i expire ,
and evening on its darkness fell
but between the infinite height and the infinite hollow
lived or written better than savage . "
of the love that never died ,
with the eloquence of tears .
but thay stuck weel together like a dog to a boan .
gazed longingly upon that lovely place ,
and i gied it to the weaver .
the work as of a kingly palace gate ,
to strive for him who suffered strife
for nations yet unborn ,
and unto us those holy lights gave need ,
my teacher thus without delay inquir'd :
when the skies were bright and fair .
nec drances potius , sive est haec ira deorum ,
when the dawn is loud with battle
a little white thistle moon
at high mycena| , till from heaven be sent
when as the giants of frost rule o'er the deep ,
by the dismal tarns and pools
should miss the vision of delight .
i wish you to see that jenny and me
“ ignorant of grasping more than all the gods
ef i only had my ruthers;--
he is enjoined to choose his food
and all the turmoil of the dukes , with hope his heart grew fain ;
with a beaded fern you waved away a gnat . . .
ay ! lift the flag of england ;
impenetrable is that shield i know ,
protected ; but the rain now drenches them ,
is garmented ,
which frail mortals invent , them to rob of their ease .
and innocence bewails the evil time .
if she followed the ways of her mother .
the slaughter of the persian hosts ?
but for the high priest , whom may ill betide ,
so , should you not desire to be
woven by the moon 's own daughter ,
this comes of nursing long and watching late .
nunquam muta quies ; ubi illa dudum
therfor i pray thee , sir stuarde ,
and waits for gabriel to play
of the remaining works of peterhouse               r. wi . , g.
oft in your gayest , happiest hour ,
con firme pecho y con serena frente ;
with the king to hunt , on a mouse he went :
and hym that hym techyth taketh for his frende
his narrow road — the open sun .
on an ocean clear and blue .
look up -- your brains begin to swim ,
so had the trees that autumn - time laid down
the autumn triumph over drought and dearth .
oh ! he must everywhere appear .
answered from their promontory . ,
trained in the lore of rome and greece ,
my father couldna work , and my mother couldna spin ;
the wood , my love , is full of woes .
shonnin . then i will ; with all my might , and may god
and through the wide - flung casement reaching hand
þat date of ȝere wel knawe þys hyne ;
we drink , we sing heigh - ho , the holly !
like the horns of an angry bull .
and day by day some current 's thwarting force
avenging the weders , { 6b } whose woe they sought , --
from our first loves the first fair verse arose ,
i saw him once before ,
of _ pembroke hall , _ and
and kissed her lips that knew of no love yet ,
numbering ilka bud which nature
of ilium have had their hour ;
close scanned her old deserted home . then came
all thoughts , _ save those that tend to _ getting princes .
that the anguish of the singer
fill my bag with fresh provisions ,
_ lux hareshulla tibi warwici villa , tenebris ,
hear father curse !
or of minnesingers in old black - letter ,
which possessed some rural charm .
where'er one man may help another,--
with all the lurid light and gleam of earth ?
best is thy dwelling - place--
they gather the elder - bloom white ;
we 'll try a glass of bitter beer -
and more , two tripods cast in antic mold ,
by the fair lady brunhild . many a loving swain
might ! sing your triumph - songs !
rising or falling still advance his praise .
they only saw with heavy eyes ,
each morning now we hurry through .
as she leaned down my kisses to meet .
thus ráma spake , the mighty souled ;
all the lovely morning .
him counterfet , if any eye beheld .
seizes quick the water - monster ,
and the throbbing heart that beats its own drum to the grave ,
held aloft in sign of welcome ,
to say his message , be forever done ;
their state affairs . so thick the very crowd
" no doubt ;
the honey - seeking
kinds , measures of corn , wine , or oil , etc . etc . , not to say
may flame bite in your gullets , sore eyes and rank
a rock by the side of the sea .
then at his feet fell with humility ;
nay , nor the world , nor any living thing , will so cohere . )
unto the rockies straightway to arise
recommended and assisted
and often through a rude and worn disguise
thy sunshine on her joyful way ,
clanis , and clytius fall , by different wounds .
i float above ye all into the trance
though to myself forsworn , to thee i 'll constant prove ;
and from its mirror looked the lean
it is pleasant to walk over the beds of these fresh , crisp , and
the best last novel of the hour .
her face still lifted up . and she
beneath the table where it lay . but all the others gave
a commander in the crisis of a battle ( probably that of
and then -- if death can find us in the heart of the wood--
how very happy i should be ,
for cricket to shame it !
proceedings possess a herdesque astuteness ; in the scale
and the victor shall win thee , lady dear ! "
" o griefe of griefes ! o gall of all good heartes !
for damme if i ha'n't lost every toe .
dear lord and leader , at whose hand
interesting ; the images neither originate in that sane state of
her virgin train sweeps down the glade ,
und i really peliefe vhere breitmann go , de hops
my dream - fruit tree a palace bore
for tears to shed , and songs to sing ,
perhaps another season
there pilgrims climb slowly one by one ,
for his shameful ende : fortuned for lacke of lore .
he was my only brother . she
his locks divine
to readers of a riper age ,
" and three reds shall not go before thee to red 's house .
i glory in the spirit
and heaven far as sees the eye ,
all the bells are set adrift :
and she saw inside , when the form in the flesh had gone ,
( contains a vast deal of interesting information on the subject
then with a hollow voice thus went he on :
of night was on the city , even her breath
nae lintwhite on a ' the green plain ,
so e’re _ arachne _ to her cell repairs ,
yet who would fear to fumigate with thyme ,
and served its end . the story stuck with me .
yellow are thy time - worn pages ,
against the clouds of grey to seaward drifting ,
last with one midnight stroke all the first - born
by monarchs clad in gems and gold ,
that here is juster cause of plaintful sadness !
the steel thessalian stabb'd ; the scanty blood
in clearer light the moss - built cell
from thy pure brows , and from thy shoulders pure ,
and the young child gave this answer :
return in safety to my trojan friends .
my life and all seemed turned to clay .
weak man whose days are quickly told .
for pride , for potency , infinity ,
the righteous ruler ,      when his wrath he speaks
leave all for love ;
that auld , capricious carlin , nature ,
aquatic plants ; these animals have been shown by ingenious
knocking my pipe out , i entered a bookshop ;
then tell me whence thou art , and what the share
unless i do ? "
while a moist , rank , stifling , dead perfume
que sucederme pudièra .
like yours may sweeten and perfume my death .
" to die -- and unavenged ? yea , let me die !
his mother was wretchedly poor ;
like the harnessed wheel of a great machine ,
like figures that a dreamer sees at night .
a sudden wonder rose .
nor see our will the golden age restore .
they reckon least how little hope
that kullervo thus might perish .
the kindest will appear . '
cut them on wednesday , cut them for health ;
but when he saw that life was fled ,
but nature lost the date of this ,
and , as a hare , whom hounds and horns pursue ,
the starry cohorts shake their shielded suns ,
thou eternal artist - forger ,
but what i can lure with that little horn ’s sound . ”
not more ; for honours , riches , kingdoms , glory ,
whom fortune 's various ways have severed long ,
" i command , " said karl , " that ye both be still .
and blades of grass which in their primal growth
next week , the aged councillor was shaking in his shoes .
then the mill stream rose in its might ,
" in vain are laws past ,
nuts , grains , fruit , and fish , to regale ev'ry palate ,
dismay'd , confus'd , he feels alas ! too late ,
to their escape , discover alery ;
my lineage ( thousands can attest it true )
o huntress who could never kill ,
what high , poetic , awe - struck grand old golfer ,
thereupon the heroes wandered ,
" to their hearts ' desire they scolded ,
a crystal off the green leaf slipped .
wearing apron soft and pliant ,
the surly , grumbling ferrymen ,
" he that hath failed in a little thing
bethink you ` tis the kaiser
a feller 's forred , a - gittin ' down
robin was watching to discover
adrawdd fy nolur ddwysgur ddysgiad .
though meant each other 's aid , like man and wife .
moved on half conscious , her lost love to meet .
the dream we sell for your pottage of truth--
i op'd my eyes , before me view'd , and saw
and owes its being to the gazer 's eye .
king of two hands , he does his part
as pain and languor chose to bore him ,
him glorious with unborrowed light ,
gleam'd in the stars .
is it a wash of the yellow moss ,
in the skies .
that can sing both high and low :
fishes that tipple in the deep
while through the crimson - shrouded window falls
but he knows my john .
enamoured him , so tamed his haughty mind ;
so now i maun wander abroad ,
th ' stakes , eleven - thousand - plunks in gold !
now with threatenings new
but was not half so desolate ,
love still a boy and oft a wanton is ,
qui fuit in teneris , et servantissimus aequi .
how sweetly he implies her praise !
as like him as he 's now like me ,
and busy talkers said they bore
or ' mid the venal senate 's roar ,
for in his little features she could find
by prudent counsel which i dearly loved ,
thou also hast had the world 's buffets and scorns,--
at last to give that virgin heart away
the wise men came to the inn that night ,
me to its game : it seemed to bless
in grecian barks capacious hence be borne ,
her altars desecrate , her fires unfed ,
soon it will rise and blow in waves--
who sank thy sunless pillars deep in earth ?
life must be what we make of it .
her home it was killarney .
o'er the gray water :
victorious . thus repulsed , our final hope
i think that blow was by some angel stayed ,
now again the wood - sprite grinning
a drum within .
he glanced : the old flag met his sight .
oh , wild does he ride through the rain and mire ,
thy praises ev'rywhere ,
of heaven 's truth -- man 's liberty ;
ah ! no : what dire , unthought - of woes assail !
may this cure of sorrow have .
of blinded suns that meet ,
that like to serpents stung ,
tyrrhenians , he was the only person that escaped unwounded .
dim superstition with her ghastly train
circle , to abash the creature
these loves of mine ,
o , spare to sing , what none deny ,
have here my trouthe , and that thou shalt wel here . ' --
the vital streams a chilling horror froze ;
thoughts alien to thoughts kindred , and to merge
i argues that there 's work that must be done ,
the life of hector quench'd in mid career ,
to the billows ' music wild ;
through the grey
and siege of tenderest courtesy ,
crooked you are , but that dislikes not me :
and intimations given with hand and head ,
for the blessings life lends us , it strictly demands
and a peacock out of the jungle calls
do not reach the generations
many a wound was given , and let out many a life .
that makes no show for dawn
but not a reformation so ,
the truncheon of the shameful spear
happy hearts and happy faces ,
his tragedies were reckoned much too thoughtful for the stage ;
now was that people distant far in space
flung it aside , when she her face surveyed
mycelia there pervade the ground ,
till nations shall unconsciously aspire
arabia and sabaea you must strip
retire ! retire , and leave me !
striding on from hill to hill - top .
wherefore so soon by gloomy clouds surrounded !
the _ clothes moths _ with gossamer covered the door ;
and found achilles in his inner tent :
i suffer'd it not long , and yet so long
created oftentimes a lake of blood .
takes a tint of silver gray ;
" it 's nobbut a murderer 's grave , fair sir ,
" and you with wealth and state shall guerdoned be ,
between the lines . ]
haunted , haunted , haunted -- we that mocked and sinned
o voice vibrating like the song of birds ,
the almighty heard him as he prayed holding the altar - horns ,
but , like the sun , o'er all
no children run to lisp their sire 's return ,
" alas ! what boots the long laborious quest "
to drag the ploughshare through the soil ,
can fishes live , nor blood in timber be ,
for they 've been to the lakes , and the torrible zone ,
( brother of henry iii . ) , elected king of the romans ; and
albeit sákra 's self had failed to break
with no pleasures except sins ,
baim - wa'wa , the sound of the thunder
understand the two controversies , or he willingly misrepresented
moons look sadly on her breast
of strong hands on a keyboard above , and the light ,
high lust and froward bearing ,
this is a valentine for you .
above , below , around , with art dispread ,
heaven lies about us in our infancy !
the lines from ver . 217 to 221 are thus varied in the ms . :
a good time , was it not , my kingly days ?
food and drink in all abundance ,
as though a tongueless nightingale should swell
over the welling waves      his wearied heart .
with all that nicety of aim
with his gold axe on his shoulder ,
spake the hero , lemminkainen ,
" but what have ye done with the bearing - bread ,
where woods went down to hereford ,
till ' e finds ' isself one mornin ' with a full an ' proper kit .
went inta bradford straight .
on the afternoon of the preceding day .
them quick resentment stung , but him the most ,
the old and young were well supplied ,
i 'm partial to a music-'all ,
could we cease our busy buying ,
rings o'er the echoing sea ;
to make me sad to go .
one day i sought with her hart - thrilling eies
his chest expand for breath , and heard at last
each thread and filament of water - courses ,
he 'll mak it whissle ;
with jealousy the heart
for such as ye--
and modest when the world she sees ;
the shepherds slept ; and , glimmering faint ,
but never a fish came wand'ring by .
he soon replied , " i do admire
little more than her thanks for his kindness , he read
i looked on it with right good - will .
and childer e white made t ’ village ta ring .
to darkness , such as bound the ocean wave .
piled with a dapper dresden world,--
his soul exalted waxed and amorous,--
for i love you .
herein thou shalt confess me no false spy .
my father , and the ancient men , whose feet
" you and i , p'raps , are what we 're made .
and my soul was torn
" they bid thee follow on the path , now made
then at the wash - tub stand , at morning 's break ;
in the proud soldan 's presence , and there preach'd
draw near and learn salvation , see
let but divinity become thy will !
makes sunrise jealous of her rosy red ,
for i too am a woman , and these boys
the plan of god to men .
dinner - time
ho by kynde schal be - com clerer þen are ;
while braving the storms that but hasten us there .
poem , " the lincoln boulder , " by , 244 .
once again for the poor in defence of the right ;
of silence as more perilous i deem'd ,
by many a glad wild water - bird !
--the hozzenwald , the hauenstein mountains . see note to page 15 .
at last , though long by penury control'd ,
suffered himself to express , in terms at once too large and too
that with long beams the shame - fac't night array'd ,
four only met . the ship of thomas drake
madonna sheltered with her holy child ,
how the whirl , the contest , the wrestle of evil with good , the
london bridge is broken down ,
edged with poplar pale ,
stretch'd forth in wrath shall drive thee from the land .
see you when and whether
but equipoise of nature , alternating
hell opened her mouth and swallowed him up .
its balmy fragrance and romantic forms ,
and he , the wary , cried : " run to the passage ;
and slipped back to the lodge of my mother ,
but scale the bulwark of this fortress high ,
then rose and started for the west . "
the merowings ' favor has failed us wholly .
did you feel her wild heart beat ?
felt impulse forcible to publish loud
in regnum coelorum ubi habitatio est sine ullo desiderio . "
toward you our hearts are tender .
" what fishe is of sauor swete and delicious,--
where the mud - reef sucks and draws ,
the shatter'd fane for gods departed made ;
it tossed and tossed , --
or bounteous heart that knows not woe ,
( and about that self - same attic -- lord ! wherever have you been ?
sweet spirit , comfort me !
the pullet , in her talons circled round ;
here you in silence may your eyelids close,--
o to rot into the ruddy soil
and in the shady lanes
i am the least of worth :
the boat has left the stormy land ,
all cheeks looked pale upon rinaldo 's side ;
the last train starts upon its dangerous way ,
i 'm downright dizzy wi ' the thought ,
there was a jonah with them ; for the seas
and you are now asleep .   the night 's so thick ,
and up and started her ain true love ,
my heart was otherwhere ,
and gratefully a tribute pay
as meant to indicate a god to man ,
who from my breathing had perceiv'd i liv'd ,
come between thee and me .   sweet preciosa !
and winds convey the aery racks of vapour .
of xanthus , and with countless corpses choked
alas ! for the rarity
( written for , and inscribed to , w. m. the younger . )
the noble sun begins to ride ?
what task has each and where the way .
in crystal towers and turrets richly set
this racks the joints , this fires the veins ,
it , because they sparkle when thou smilest ; but i know not who
much to rearrange ;
yet the bridegroom astonish'd beheld with great pain ,
“ now i without the copse that day was hid .
or rhododendron worn .
silver and gold , you 'll have your fill of me ,
be witness that my mother 's tears i had no heart to bear .
the mudville center - fielder smiles and reaches forth in glee ,
lurk near , to smite with death . and o'er the crags
nor for faith , nor for new generations ,
and snaky discord whets her sting in vain . ]
truth from error to discern :
will keep the maithil lady still ,
and fear not lest existence closing your
her message told , may not endure ;
( who used to praise my lines , my own)--
the same strength of heart and mind characterises that passage of
bear , like the turk , no brother near the throne .
say , whither , whither art thou faring ?
some noble hambden rises into fame .
all earthly , gross , infernal ,
its charm so frank and fugitive .
and much we regretted the shadows of eve ,
so good - night , with lullaby .
did it vex you , the surmise
shaped like the great aeneas , and endowed
own unity . divers virtue makes divers alloy with the precious
had tuoni brought thee hither ,
between us and that wild , how far , how near ,
that them may'st gratify with thy return
for supper ' sake , which with tir'd feet he seeks ,
he ran it with .
if brought to the hammer and very well sold ,
res quibus occultas penitus conuisere possis .
children twain , but short of life were they , godlike otus
his eyes with burning wrath aglow ,
without or praise or blame , with that ill band
agamemnon 's bridal slave
and little footsteps lightly print the ground . "
do i become a spy . that character
we would sit down and think which way
was taken ill on tuesday ,
if that ye winds would hear
no angel now to roll the stone
from whom andromache shall ne'er receive
waking its various tones with skill divine ,
not as the people pleas'd , but as they paid ;
nor from the ritualism of youth which is make - believe .
from brilliant prospects , to pursue the path
whereat he answer'd , that the gipsy - crew ,
andrew reid , a man not without considerable abilities and not
for cunning hand to fashion on ;
and where the wall is built in new
we seek evander . go , the news declare :
the constable to raise their spleene the hyer ,
to swell the _ rules _ , for majesty , and state ,
the quenchless malice , that consumes her breast ,
he fought a thousand glorious wars ,
he sat at wine in his gold and his lace ,
but never mind,--she 'll turn , perhaps , next week ;
lay dying -- sons , daughters , church - deacons , lovingly tending him ,
you , your soul like a lady - smock , lost , evanescent ,
to feel if the heart of my house beat right .
the more below his triumph , who from hence
which proved no mind possessed with fire divine ;
or brew my bridal ale ?
but the young earl said : " ill the saints ,
long since , that once was sweet with shivering brass ,
i know no blot upon my life 's fair record .
tel my legs wuz straight enugh
what , warrior ’s arm with hermit ’s zeal ?
one night a glow - worm , proud and vain ,
and bend to stubborn yokes , and champ the bit ,
while musing thus he stood , stunn'd with dismay
to charon , by the caverned water 's shore ,
we know your secret ! what 's done is done .
of those proud ministers of heaven ,
the cause he did not ask .
phillis laughed , the saucy jade : " sir shepherd , wilt have this ,
he packs his kit and steals adown the road
these rules will render thee a king complete
like night when not a star appears ,
even so i will endure , with a heart within me patient of
that your children , seized of a better sense ,
to fetch and carry nonsense for my lord .
they rise like nereids from a river , singing ,
recomforted , and after thoughts disturbed
as from the thick scrub they emerge .
" hast thou forgot thy oath?"--
and turned the song on the midmost string ;
of kings with godlike might endued .
in our communications smile .
while the crowd runs by the way ,
dignus cui leges , dignus cui pignora tanti
the town 's third part was this , or little less ,
and at this the children all burst out laughing afresh .
nor could she cover it with all her art .
but safely amidst all this did he descend
er worked out , through long nights o ' rain ,
stand smoking on the board ,
the wary trojan , bending from the blow ,
should warriors , whom i value , to mortal strife defy .
turn round ! nor make me wait ,
and honoured ? to be chosen one
golden blossoms at thy breast ;
its melancholy radiance sent :
‘ nowe so god me helpe , ’ sayde litell john ,
his summons as the mount he viewed :
well satisfied to be his own
that glittered bright , and sparkled flaming fire ;
an ' he jumps up , outen bed ;
oh that the heavy hand of death had fallen
' tis the bean that we mean ,
arise ! awake ! and , drawing near ,
i was give a gun , ' n ' a bay'net bright ,
sit then , awhile , here in this wood--
in this large moment all thy fishes , ripples , bights ,
reference to leo of modena , _ degli riti hebraici _ , part i.
they cursed their luck , as the irish will ,
leastwise , they all vamoosed , and did n't bother us again .
but we let not trouble vex us ,
the wildest welter yet ,
and warns the loiterer to depart--
“ real poison is sold here . ”
he spied an empty bed .
constant thrusts from your eyes keep my pain fresh for ever .
as down o ' dove or maw ;
runs through her veins , vague dreams her sense fill .
yet , little soul of lily whiteness ,
and if they leant upon a reed ,
they turned their heads to mecca
the tailor came straightway :
he has n't much fear of a fall .
half pertness , half pulvilio;--
  author of the vision--[it was written by ramsay , under the name
et indole optata frui .
turning point in the young man 's life , however , can not doubted .
without a shadow resting in the ripples of its tide ;
heaven whom she childs us by .
the heart that was widow'd all evils could bear ,
she was always fond of the big white roses .
foretell new storms to those already spent .
and joy , whose hand is ever at his lips
once in northland thou wert living ,
a cow for my dairy , a dog for my game ,
subjects , grief and care to me .   i can not let my peaceful kingdom
was that the contractor did
then we shall smell how sweet you be .
and where 's your spider ?   and that 's nature , also .
or what the doctor'd say , ) -
the learned groves , ' neath rainless skies ,
when the french see the pagan cohorts swarm
but damn the chills and fever , men , we 're goin' ' ome today !
farther in litwa ; hide we from the germans
in spirit or in body hale for long , -
in its primeval state ' tis not re - wooded . "
trojans : jove sends iris to turn them back , but later on
as he will , for long he will not rule the gods,--
from the brush was gore distilling .
let placid slumbers sooth each weary mind ,
what molten floods were seen to glow !
by thousands and by thousands heaped this while ;
nomina post cineres das resonare meos .
then into him she melted , all her soul at flow .
the long - neglected son 's debts pay .
now and again ;
life quits the statue : even her tongue congeals ,
" alas , alas ! another day gone by ,
and men 's souls shot up out of reach
when faith is kneeling by his bed of death ,
the new man explains what he 's planning
and a pair o ' heels wherewith to run
guilty , trachinia 's soil receiv'd him first .
it is the tune to travel to .
whom into equal parts those strokes divide ,
ormation of the creature with a living soul .
makes a flute from kiryo 's shin - bone ,
amazing point of this discovery is the allegation that
because , as love and prayer grow cold ,
and in the boiling lake both fell .   the heat
in my lady 's time , seemed to rejoice
this day her cruel soul will be
cauld poverty , wi ' hungry stare ,
consolidation of the irish legislatures -- that is to say , a merger
" harp and carp , along wi ' me ,
{ 148e }   “ keingyell , ” ceingel ; a hank of thread .
now you that haste to meet
the one , more grave , declar'd his breed ,
that i have led a blameless life among you ,
" no , the heroes have not perished ,
' twere naught , i 'll bear it till the judgment - day !
and all night - thoughts in this strange sphere ,
whan al was mad and al wel stod ,
price 1s . or extra cloth , 1s . 6d . _
buttock when he gives him chase , and watches warily for his
deep in the caverns of the deadly tide--
then , like dew that steeps the rose ,
we each keep our letters ... a portrait ... a ring ...
ah , it must be wondrous there ! "
to him hippalca said , when she apart
our hearts , a - tremble , throbbed in harmony
then cast his eyes on carthage , where he found
the hooked chariot stood
them any harm ; alas ! nor could
i get tired of their guarded ways
with rosy lustre purpled o'er the lawn ,
the image most remote , there shalt thou see
_ five _ rival swains their tender cares unfold ,
i can bear neglect from you , ill .
nay , the wolf must not be herald ,
with menace proud , and insult loud ,
her borrow'd power of art being finished :
bright as the very sun , or place
with feverish troubled spirit , chilly and sick ,
roust , or rouse -- to upbraid with many words .
strokes the rein'd dragons ' manes , and shakes the thongs .
that is indeed our boast .   if you desire it
laughing at the storms you meet ;
as he stood on the black shaggy brow of the hill
and his price was the same , to recover or kill .
ah , and she , she would have laughed
what the last dawn of reckoning shall read .
did long for such a prey ,
the man rose up and went upon his way
whence judgment sound , and unrepenting choice .
amongst his henchmen .
is over the hill ; make fast ,
and the musics of delight ,
' twill never do to sit and wait ,
but coroner ,
the mare now given me i will myself
it bounded from his coat of mail ;
' twixt westminster and aldgate - street !
constrained by the force of kin .
speechless , motionless , unconscious
and from the eternal house above
out of the wood ,
a child may watch us and exclaim ,
de la cara ,
" here gay alcander , gay , alas ! no more ,
that one would think the first who bore it ' adam . '
the course of life that seemed so flowery to me
he walks ; and the big tears run rolling down his face .
gheezis , the great sun , behold me ! "
take her ter be vaccernate ,
and , in the road that she was taught ,
and showers of crystal spray .
" the soup might surely have had more spice ,
luedegast and luedeger , / --to waste thy land is their intent .
they can not brook your music ; they assail
.      .      .      .      .      .      .
a - grindin ' on stones .
chasing with eager hands and eyes
spurring them on maliciously to strife .
who will believe , who will not fear
a garden fresh with may--
the virtue rising in his breast ;
to feel that heaven must we that hell sound through :
dost thou know who made thee ,
" men dig and dive but can not my wealth spend "
our proper bliss depends on what we blame .
for wide - spread cornlands,--billowing golden seas ;
of dying lights and dawning ,
will glisten with love as of old .
fully , or fighting fall in death ,
the shoulders next i mark'd , that ent'ring join'd
the firelight listens on the floor
the stars were seal'd ; and then a haze
to cars which noble coursers drew ,
unpitied , till her place be found no more !
swift as the word the missile lance he flings ;
different , according to the different opinions of its readers .
travesty of miss fanshawe 's enigma      _ horace mayhew _
whom pacing backward in the throat he struck ,
of my bars and their heaven of stars overhead--
tiger - striped trees encircle the town ,
then , lifting high his hands to jove , he pray'd .
then they who see thy tears perchance may say ,
of phœbus guardian god of ismarus ,
but it is part of our delight , to measure
by which all others fall or stand
still as they run they look behind ,
with laughter as upon the rush - strewn floor
about the mossie trunk i wound me soon ,
with my _ maire bhan astor _ ,
shot from their flashing points a quivering light .
" what size are the trout , garrigou ? "
to emulate the belgian hare?=
and that ye coude wel your lady serve ,
god send our measter us never may fail
thus escape the bird of heaven .
the artless aide - de - camp was mute , the shining staff were still ,
quoth john to joan , will thou have me ;
been to your shadowy world convey'd ,
i now had hasten'd : " brother ! " she began ,
now from the temple a loud voice was heard ,
rose -- and i with light was rich;--
publication but to forty papers , which were afterwards collected
and rolled about eight feet along the floor
vainly your voice with a subtle and slightly indelicate largess ,
to pump and stable , tree and swing ,
sleepy flowers seem to nod ,
through diver passages , the world 's bright lamp
short is the way , when light 's the heart
to fall in a death - black swoon .
shrined in the mists of years
sweet lessons of her forceful art ,
the king of elfs , and little fairy queen ,
mischance should follow , slipt the ring , which brought
so the favour of princes , once altered , is ended . "
and now their native fields , for ever dear ,
their form is a ludicrous cockney perversion , but it retains the
a great vassal was charles , of france the douce ;
' querquera consequitur capitisque dolores
o ' kenmure we had need .
then his day 's work done ,
that shall no more be covered with a flood ,
shoost outside !
she sang that night ; and vivian caught the strain ,
behold , we have left all , and followed thee .
being so mighty and so just ,
for the far - off dwelling ban her brothers .
by him of pressa : galigaio show'd
not without sweat of toil is glory won ! "
right as our firste lettre is now an a ,
if in the uses of its own , it sees
stirs right and left a war intense ,
set the clear heavens on fire ;
the people all behind her sorrowing .
and the white crests went like monsters , driven
apparent queen unvaild her peerless light ,
earth 's garden to the nether hell--
and when words fail , then the singer
will she kiss me to - morrow ?
at seven o'clock on lammas morn they woke ,
so warm a flower from such a sombre bud ,
there 's trades and crafts enew , man ;
he seemed to her last spark of mind ;
i sat beside the glowing grate , fresh heaped
from my breast my silver crosslet ,
made of metal and kept quite clean ,
lo , hence i run for other arms to wield ,
lest , thus encompass'd with funereal gloom ,
envy of this wainamoinen ,
thou sun , of this great world both eye and soul ,
in their crude and lowly cabin ,
and violets their heavy heads abase ,
` for yesterday , who - so hadde with him been ,
and what shall come hereafter , who may know ?
criseyda , my freend ? ' he seyde , ` yis . '
_ andrea del sarto _ , this is the unbroken tone of his poetry .
on the curving sands and sea - sides ;
that a leal heart should break ?
and , midst gray prophet forms , and wild
draw close , but speak not .
wherefore that duteous gossip of love 's queen
a letter from france , with french pens and french ink ,
proclaim her sweet from th ' wombe as morne .
and austria , hounding far and wide
in gods eternal store , to circumscribe
de yam will grow , de cotton blow ,
with my little eye .
arts , gifts , address , these fiends despise ;
as even to the camel comes a dawn
given us , which vanish when we see a man and his wife without
for folks that wander up and down like you ,
we may see how all things are ,
i m wasser -- in der erde -- im feucht und trockenen grab .
when they , pale captives , creep to death .
and the worthy cacique tezpitla ,
all ' e solemn promised ' e will shove be'ind ' i m.
is it for this , whate'er my suitors were ,
his monstrous deformity closely concealed ,
fulofte sythe he overthroweth
it wants originality and fire ;
' now when she had given it and i had drunk it off and was
and athwart the triple string
his temples are already touch'd with snow .
that i to lady kriemhild / myself will be thy messenger . "
and the warm white clouds above ;
i promised , if it was me luck to lob
sister star of morning ! well i greet thee ;
whose open heart a brighter red displays
my lot to - day , to - morrow may be thine ;
a favourite 's porter with his master vie ,
delighted to the chamber flew ,
o'er the strings of children slain !
white as the snow , pure as the foam
the trust which i now wish to place      }
around his deeds a lustre throngs ,
now that the shade of sorrow falls
for sorow of whiche mine hert shall to - cleve ;
the sharp nose flaired them heedfully :
" behold rogero comes " ; and oft ascended
and at this hour - although i be his wife--
a sweet high treble threads its silvery song ,
and dragged me out to where , beneath the trees ,
thy praise he also , who forbids thy use ,
in that undiscover'd land .
of that foul strife whose cause a husband 's rage . "
branch after branch extend their silver stems ,
the kinśuk , now the frosts are fled , —
and wouldst thou try me ? rest thou safe till dawn !
the neighbors have no chance to get a rest .
life hath left the white bones , and the spirit like a dream
but the brain , once kindled , would still be afire
then , came his turn to write : and still the flame
to cast wind currents o'er thy pallid brow!--
ode to a nightingale
or vice ; who never understood
long as it suited the unripen'd down
then music burst upon us in a gale ;
the cheerful hearts now broken !
ah little cloud of more than human fashion
since then , though art do all it can ,
on they came through brake and thicket ,
by rávaṇ ’s arm was borne away ,
an ' i got some heart - distress .
" of this choice liquor with rare virtue blest ;
bear britain 's thunder , and her cross display ,
substance . this monster , whose extremities ended in a tail like a
sometimes all blank . sometimes one train alone
how far beyond ! " at this a surpris'd start
radise stood , good and holy , filled with blessings , ever-
oftener makes conquest where she listeth , light )
of his two dukes he 's been bereft ;
heaven and your hearts with fairest meed shall grace .
her eyes were like stars
from whose boat your father 's foot did slip
why should darkness end
laertes ' son ?
true , a new mistress now i chase ,
and , should you ask how she , a sultan 's bride ,
against the smooth and well - compacted doors , and the swift
ascended , loveliest of her sex . a seat
jane found it rather dull to read ;
and though the years may come and go
i hear a solemn murmur ,
but drank his coffee in silence , and heard in his ears
i heard the waves breaking in measured thunder
" you 're so like my sister sally ,
here , on this slope that yet hath known no plough ,
and perish in the kindled fire .
but rather thoughtful about the refined , heavenly blue legs of a
but the tall , graceful , rampant unicorn ?
who enlisted in the service ,
liadin of corkaguiney , a poetess , went visiting into the
and shook the scottish shore :
was in the town . i thought i would give my message and come back
ah ! faithless is the race of man ,
and ocean bellow from his rocky shore ,
the dawnings of your royal race ;
where the hand of the sea - god drives ?
what " blushing hippocrene " is here ! what fire
quoth our brave henry then ,
the ancient frankness of her gaze ,
when the flocks have all been watered ;
as she turns to the soft , round moon ,
where i stood beyond the house - wall ,
her eyes , she leapt out of his great wing 's shroud .
“ welcome , dear prince , whose arms are strong ;
here two good brothers of apamia were ,
oh do not walk so fast !
two for th ' inspiring god of song divine ,
with burnished neck of verdant gold , erect
with them the seed of wisdom did i sow ,
of common - weals . thou’d better then to spare
such was he : his work is done ,
down along the rocky shore
he led the mournful lady where
two fairies it was
except to shepherd christ 's poor . o , young men ,
and a road my eager feet would reach ,
and anxious eyes from the inside peep--
miserable than i am . "
its wheat 's fine flour , and its undying force .
where never fell the feet of men .
that late were all aglow ?
to beauty 's cheek the rose . "
he 's ole enough , big enough , ought to know better
herself , yet not herself ; a lovely child
when fierce dissensions cease,--
and not a mask went unimproved away :
from cob - webbed coignes of scowling passes wide ,
evil speech of multitudes within their walls .   heavy are the sins
a ram , and a lascivious boar , then seek
will shield me from sorrow as long as i wear it .
the shattered walls of lanká ’s town . ”
in his veins ran blood of that stupid race
whose loving service to the world has been
our king , the banner of our pride ,
on christmas - eve , old legends know .
he sees , moreover , how perpetually
alas fewe ar content with theyr degre
no palace standeth
thence all descend in pomp and proud array ,
never again shall i with finny oar
so , through the concourse on his rolling wheels
upon the bodiliche thinges .
where should i have a book ?
the poore harmonious bird now almost dombe ,
love , the large love that folds the multitude .
' you have chosen well , my children ,
white the love that is wakeful lives on to the last .
they hid them from his eager eyes .
his path is rugged and sore
the vacant stare -- the marble smile ,
that so her husband gave it , well pleased the margrave 's wife .
be their first - founded order strict maintain'd--
my many miseries .      hence i may not ever
following false cupid , i deny it not ,
the wind blows wet .
dakota maidens too are loveliest . "
first strip off all her equipage of pride ;
shook thousand odours from his dewy wings .
whose full eye mocked the lotus leaf ,
for her will i resign
behold the preparations , fire and iron ,
remind the vow'd to sing no more of all his weary part ;
yet i would know but you !
  on the technical problems of shakspere 's verse , see fleay 's
--this is the hour when , work put aside ,
heap on my bending back ! i ask no more.--
and the violin weaving the waltzers a story ,
and this perverse commotion governd thus ,
that i the manuscript possessed .
when , at thy bidding , the electric wire
for ye therof so wel have spoke ,
and boldly venture to whatever place
until the blight of evil touched its bloom
powerful inciters , we should neglect , and sink into a senseless
there many a bird of broadest pinion built
deep . and strong winds , the bane of ships , are born of the
in flows the godhead 's living stream .
must these , alas ! be ceaseless in your own ?
of nature in their lovely pitilessness ,
so noble , so undaunted ,
" not unconcerned wachusett rears his head "
they had learn'd and practised purcell 's glee ,
minstrel , " a   poem in which a happy use is made of the traditions
before the coursers with a sudden spring
before thou yet wast born . ”
the whole world on a raft !   a king is here ,
the hubs of logs from the " settler 's ellum,"--
and now , while the little scout -- in fulfilment of her established
how in those hours -- too dread for thought or speech--
“ pour'd with her tears , still musically sound .
hark ! the night winds
that flutters down ;
and pounds were in the land ,
the noisy swallows wheeled above their nests ,
with nothing but moonlight around it .
to see the puny goblin there :
one 's small limbs of chickens , done _ en papillote _ .
and alfred could see that his cousin was taken
unto some old and bearded khan , -
peace keeps us company to - day
celui qu'en vain je voudrais oublier
then returned unto his dwelling ,
who , but a christian , through all life
what marbles , bronzes , pictures , parchments , books ;
to where , o'er the marvellous tides of the air ,
who three generations saw ,
deeper than plummet lies ,
for pitous ioye , and wenden hir delyte ;
the hapless nymph with wonder saw :
to ape thy dare - devil array ?
no longer forth he bounds
of light when once he kissed her in a dream , ...
more it displeases god ; and so stand lowest
but then , _ i _ am the one it hurts ,
oaks which the late hurricane has scattered upon me . i am
that yet will wave wi ' yellow corn ,
but after fatigue in the wet an ' the sun ,
of man 's genius for a space ,
the old time chides the new : these deem it long
make you as poor a dog as i am ,
would trample on the type of freedom 's code ,
the lines though touched but faintly are drawn right ,
came to the mariners ' hollo !
mine eyes with such an eager coveting ,
they backed her at seven to three .
when the oped casement with the night - rain drips .
almost he turned again -- but _ hark _ !
" then seek ( they said ) a worthier quest , secure
beyond our tents the sands stretch level and far ,
then didst thou make answer , swineherd eumaeus : ' old man ,
in marat she descried a victim,--
thunder clouds hung overhead ,
yet scarce he on his back could get ,
we wonder what will be ,
different virtues needs must be the fruits
siegfried , the hero of the golden hair ,
and there my muse with heav'nly transport glow :
whom thy mother has instructed ,
thereto approch to tempt her mind to ill .
here 's a theame will drinke th ' expence ,
it bounds , it shoots away ; the crashing wood
from their rapt devotee 's adoring sight .
blush at the curious stranger peeping in ;
¿ qué fueron sino pesares
conceal'd by night they gently swam along ,
the greatest saint is nought except the lord direct his way .
then the whole land is lost indeed in night .
thus i ; and with him , as he forward went ,
who knoweth my pitiless breast ?
shall lure it back to cancel half a line ,
ill - fated ruth ! in hallow'd mould
and look around
" many people read a song
the softened season all the landscape charms ;
of ratza , who hath counterfeited ill
to - morrow came , to bring us woe and war .
if teucrians seek on latin soil to frame
dey killt five hoondred shbarrows
lays a hand on the shoulder of god !
the matter drifted .   then sir everard chid
oh , i ' ave come upon the books ,
joy as fathomless as brief .
{ 93 } tradition says that she had hanged herself . cf . " odyssey "
thet 's robin - redbreast 's almanick ; he knows
a gay and wandering cry .
she went to the clerk , to toll the great bell ;
pray , sir , allow her -- she is never crossed .
he , upon pinions swifter than the wind ,
or , by the gods ! we 'll force you out
a gibbous moon , like a ghost of woe ;
stanza xxxi . line 1 .
" next by sensation led , new joys commence
" even in remembrance far beyond
or weld a broken link ;
if any take me for that which i seem :
th ' old woman wants a nurse ;
as if we might have seen .
that goodë was with ale .
and noblemen beside ,
i do n't suppose he 'd care , to stay to dine
so often hast thou come , and from my side
who measured six feet and some inches in height .
know nought of sorrow all her days :
as they thrash to and fro ,
cum lectum flentes circum staremus amici ,
he addressed to him in 1775 . ( birkbeck hill 's ' boswell ' , 1887 ,
crept forth to st . peter 's shrine ,
i shall come back no more ; my ship
why are those looks , those looks the which have been
rest ye till persecution 's cup be drained ;
and though unseen on earth we dwell ,
and one was young,--young with that youth
the night was dark , but darker still the clouds
became a charming occupation .
taking the sword to perish with the sword
this ivied cot revere .
wise people , simple people , children of despair --
the current glass peruse ;
in this unhappy mansion , or once more
where moon -- bare - bosomed goddess of the hunt--
twelve warriors , hand to hand , his prowess felt .
to the rice - swamp dank and lone .
what though she milked no cow with crumpled horn ,
certum erit interea quanto sit major habenda
manibus isdem quibus ulixi saepe permulsi abluam ,
of his going in galilee ;
o father ! o father !
not like papa , for he
could make divine affection cheap ,
two friends
jovial wind of winter
contemplatively looking into
sincerity and wells of tenderness : " mother -- come ! "
and fanned the transports of the fire .
his children too are hers.--
( a picture of how people try
dear to his people , the land of the brondings
a barren mother , a mother - maid ,
to wisdom serene and whole .
yet that the book of all books it must be ,
go on too with this ;
of the pines , ranked , lofty , straight ,
and insect world , on joyous wing ,
yes , we love this land that towers
facit delicias libidinesque .
rebeck and mandoline .
o mary , triumphs , morn and eve !
turning himself the walls to scan ,
that holy sphere the dame attained ,
and in a haycock gently kiss'd her ?
' thanks , i do n't have to , ' shepherd ern replied ;
at length the mayor broke silence :
hither bend ye , turn ye hither ,
' the _ work - house _ found them ; we were carried there .
and under cryptomeria - tree
it takes ten fingers and a will
that lay before him indistinct and vast ,
but , o great god ! omniscient ever just ,
at last he woke , and with profound
" it was june in the garden "   _ emile verhaeren _
for every shape as real seemed
al retumbar sobre mi frente el rayo ,
and builds a heaven in hell 's despair . "
sing in their high and lonely melody .
a minnau wyf gwyllt gerthrychiad
nor let the childless only taste delights ,
i carried my drum and my sticks ,
vvho for my wilful crime art banisht hence .
my sympathies were warming fast
with blue spots .
meantime , read all the national debt - sinkers ,
then their slain leader to the camp convey .
which vulcan , skilful workman , gave to jove ,
" chase your shadow , it will fly you ;
bid thee bite the dusty ground ;
the monster moving onward came as fast
and kidnapped the shepherd -- now doomed to be fried as
that you 'd doubt if ' twas really a jackass indeed .
with none to chase him in his chariot whirl'd .
mohareb returns ,
" his shoote it was but loosely shott ,
i from both will keep me , and thus will sorrow never . "
the farmer 's daughter hath frank blue eyes ;
to yield himself his captive and his slave ;
and studying every law of form and rhyme ,
they sang in days gone by ;
her gesture , motion , and her smiles ,
day of the cloud in fleets !   o day
for this were shame to do him further wrong
nine ' undred of ' is county an ' the regiment 's disgrace ,
now soft on the sand , now loud on the ledge ,
and day by day the walls and bastions fall
as at home thou didst protect them
no more does the _ apache _ .
o father -- let me in ! "
and the woods meat , before he went away .
to meet the sun upon the upland lawn .
but is deform'd with some foule imperfection .
" her presence banish'd all his peace " .
then thus the prince : " to these shall we afford
and drive from fight the impetuous homicide ? "
' twere worth ten years of peaceful life ,
or the imatra terrific ,
not on them the poor rely ,
can not know how i can prosper ,
with all things ladies want , save one or two ,
my darling went unto the seaside , 281 .
in the left side deep he pierced him .
highly favoured , the lord is with thee :   blessed art thou among
by her large buckler and protended spear .
around his forehead gleamed ;
halt ! turn ! when she elected to be bad ,
the true form of the ring is circular , but by us it is seen
and we cried unto the living god , who rules the fate of war ,
and betty will be my love ,
god grant to us the strength of men ,
i say it , and it sounds the same--
plutus , one morn , met master cupid ;
then let us spare , at least , their graves .
still we shall find the old mill wheel in motion ,
where the last saxon , canonized , lay ,
i'th'ark with her to give a place ,
harten against her selfe , her conquer'd spoile ,
the old woman spins , and her wheel
brief even as a watch within the night .
of that wild rout that tore the thracian bard
and the new songs of cheer
and careless as cat could well be ,
strong knights reel back like birds affrayed
would i were out of it , done with it , would i could be
grave with the music of
in me mutatum quid nisi fata uelis ?
of angry tones , and each sword - like word ;
so run along , and wipe your eye ,
she climb'd the wall , and followed him ,
bows on every nail and rafter ,
and my heart would nigh stop beatin '
and consort - queens whose names oblivion blots ;
or her tumble induced a concussion of brain ,
ones never die .
i said that few could exculpate the past
as one who loved the flag .
nature was in her beryl apron ,
up and down ,
of fickle heart .
that nations of a common tongue , tho weak ,
or whether , rapt in meditation high ,
nor long shall be our labour , yet ere dawne ,
qui mæstos hyacinthos , et picti [ greek : anthea ] tophi
for , where the handmaid must obey ,
thou most indulgent , most tremendous power !
is dear to dog and cat ,
wherever runs the breathless sun ,
of kid and porcupine and hare ,
these hills , where , far from life 's discordant throng ,
to find it full of poetry , and so
and i heard the coolie cry for his fare ,
with faltering words and eyes suffused ,
the rods are the only thing .
twelve years ' tide the trouble he bore ,
on the quiet braes asleep .
of a sunny shallow sea .
that , as the drops below its brink ,
breathes through our troubled life that voice of thine ,
and , as they humbly bowed the head ,
in countless thousands summon all .
and fell adown his shoulders with loose care ;
and we have yet large day , for scarce the sun
stream , sundered by the might of god when he made the earth , and
cum flueret lutulentus , erat quod tollere velles ;
they kindle with a fiercer glare ,
from earth were drawn , by the unceasing mesh
there was the aretine , who from the arms
ah ! who can tell to what strange paradise ,
the fair hellenic shapes of old
the fishers hail each other not--
yet is the voice of comfort heard ,
for want of such relief , may die ere morning--
hallowed by her lonely tears
gerveis answered ; " certes , were it gold ,
there , spell - bound halt;--so , first since youth began
not slip from your hands .
i am sorry for dis fighting ,
the earth seems to retire , and all the sounds
amoros " to wit , her love - lit glance , of aelis her speech
ah , and he takes careful notice of everything .
when he 'd eaten eighteen , he turned perfectly green ,
has , from my arm unfailing , struck the bow ,
of whom all such as came of age were stow'd ,
receive thy new possessor : one who brings
in this kingdom by the sea )
how he hit the curves of matty and the shoots of miner brown .
in meats and drinks , which on the earth shal bring
to the fiercely raging whirlpool ,
a figure flits like one a - wing
with murder for a wreath ?
excluded from the royal line .
it is in truth a pretty toy
and makes fine - drawn lines with its point .
accomplished .
he made and loveth all .
thus did they converse ; but the others , when they had finished
for this is sure ye shall all leue behynde
who were all glory and all grace , and now
let washington 's great name
o little , lilting birdeen , cease !
that i , in whom the sweet time wrought ,
one half a little old cottage
the thunder rolls dreadfully through the dark sky ,
while each enjoys his vineyard 's peaceful shade ,
nor good dry land : nigh founder'd on he fares ,
it look'd a wild uncultivated shore ;
and there , while soft - hued beauty reigns
the yawning youth , scarce half awake , essays
nat field bestrode our sign
illustrations of these technical beauties of musical rhythm ,
were men 's abodes , or nodding to their fall .
clothed in a radiance not its own ! "
to walk far other paths , and with the crowd
parade and sham - fight , iii . 368 ;
the bright wing , the black hoof ,
he had not marched far ere he espied
and the misty and salt - bleached headlands ,
grandfather of the days is he ,
o , love , love , love !
& efte amended w{i}t{h } a mayden þat make hade neu{er } .
below her waist , and quiv'ring on the gale ,
a thocht ahint , in runkled breeks ,
where lads and lasses , in their best attire ,
and sent so many lords of war by orcus ' road adown ?
where the foam dances in the sun ,
who , scared by scolding uncles ' tongues , their terror are
downward from whence a man his garments loops .
_ on the scars of the lord still remaining . _
their communion in kine .
thus warn'd , fair maid , apollo 's ire to shun ,
oh menelaus , mighty chief ! with thee .
a quarter - sessions chairman , abler none ;
o even in memory !
" blessed is he that cometh
with a crimson finger drew
and all the sullen houses
and inward ripeness doth much less appear ,
ny - rik'ki .    a son of tapio .
fade from the landscape.--age is blind to youth .
affrighted , kept her still , and let him pass
sweet peace for two beneath the trees ,
tell a story that concerns thee
all in the dark along the wall ,
as there they told their love again ?
ere he 'd surpassed his peers and all his men .
and where the stars have sway ,
' tis market - day to - morrow ;
in all the years we have been friends , my own .
villaringen elder , balthes :
that thing maun never be ;
dear love , come back , resume your ancient sway
oh , happiness , our being 's end and aim !
de darky stay ! ho , ho !
were before nor can be ever !
the traitor hale was toasting !
and there together searched the hidden store
this cloud of causeless woe dispel ,
but haunt the dim verandah till the moon
and the june sun warm
some music all my own . i had a dream
i , my love and omnipotence task'd ,
* the victoria bridge at montreal .
but being full up of the myths that are greek--
those sentiments did not admire ,
with its toil , hath ended soon ;
it will instruct us in the speediest way . "
... hæret lateri lethalis arundo .
golden daughters , loud - lamenting .
quhar evir is nycht , and nevir lyght dois repar ,
that on the champain lay . the bull - hide guard
then study chiefly to improve
life of all being divine :
his name i set mine , and my death ! -
she sings and watches like a bird ,
do they matter?--those dreams from the pit ? ...
and her old father clad in sorry guise ,
oceanus , to a feast among the ethiopians , and the other gods went
immanuel died to save ,
indifferent great stars ,
outer world -- its sneers and spurning--
mighty in power , and from the god - like mars ,
with sails outwearied of the wandering seas ;
honeyless days and days did he let pass ;
y la nave avanzó . y el océano ,
' twas a child that so did thrive
then cease , bright nymph ! to mourn thy ravished hair ,
woos me with apples and with locks of hair ,
but ah ! it is not love 's .
we shall surely get burnt , for ' tis coming this way :
keep all your loneliness unknown ,
and the thousand charms belonging
a yellowing marble , placed there
he was so utterly aghast
" yes ! i have given a promise ; i 'd fain my words abide .
flounders in mud . o jesu , make it stop !
in us . and therefore , when a thing is heard or seen , which may
an their heids i ' the licht ;
of palest glamours steeped . and far and low
" will the stork , intending rest ,
_ closet - gods _ , the roman lares .
and put its tail through in between the two ,
skimming cream , sat aino 's mother .
and soon the bough they bended down ,
teach us , sprite or bird ,
for i hear you at your play ,
the sky ... pagan and meaningless .
when giants bloud did staine phlegraean ground ;
are now to partial gallia dear ;
but far too mild her penance , uma thought ,
deep in the burning vault his dazzled eyes .
dreams that shine by with unremembered feet ,
the brackish water that we drink
and now lies dead by that empyreal dome
as when some shepherd , from the rustling trees(110 )
and thou , trident - god who rul'st the sea
he had thrown , and had miss'd
the answer given thou canst unfold aright ,
and sat beside me in her chair ;
on thee and thine this night i will inflict ,
but christine heard him murmuring in the night ,
then the youthful joukahainen
all which i took from thee i did but take ,
whose leaf , " though dark , " like milton 's hœmony ,
come , brother , hasten to fulfil
sat on it , moveless as the brooding dove
the long serpent was she christened ,
and social festivals were few .
and the heron , the shuh - shuh - gah ,
resignes him up with heav'n and earth renewd .
with a laugh and a blow made his old cheeks burn .
next from the squadron , whence had issued forth
through the gorge that gives the stars at noon - day clear--
moses and samuel , and either john ,
" tho ' lightly prized the ribboned parchments three ,
may be , large and tawny , both well filled with fodder , of
sends them to us with his message .
river boat , nor ocean shallop ,
awed to contrition by the strong appeal
legs wrapped in sand - bags,--lumps of chalk and clay
instruct his family in every rule ,
he saw once more that woman dread :
fallen the noblest
in sable sludge--
cuando contemplo el cielo
and a little handkerchief ,
what sight - dazzling diamond can equal her eye ?
evermore earthward , till with no surprise
and hither , like a tyger from the chase ,
perhaps acts second to some sphere unknown ,
--even weaker than the father in that regard , and
he chastens with forbearing ;
defile my soul with deed of shame ? ”
so that he had much better cause to grieve
that crests the blue - gray wave ,
as if my lips were virgin of the vow .
at new ; but one that in fore - passed time
with tenfold speed our sharp beaks cleft the gloom ,
but the doctor 's your mark , for the lord 's holy ark ,
with faulchion drawn and with death - threat'ning looks
is fallen away , at no o'erlong remove
was over - watched , for all his hundred eyes :
for advertising .
long spears of golden grain !
for one thing only , her hid there !
" i thank thee , trusty servant ,
then the army , elsewhere bent ,
of my predestinated mate ;
here his voice died down , and reggie stooped over him .
' taxis ' and ' tubes ' we beg to state
from far the sons of imbracus he slew ,
and he said , " ' tis some frog
little orphant annie 's come to our house to stay ,
" not upon her , " said he ,
he did n't have to draw a scale ,
they are so modest , pure and fair ;
forgets that his prime is past ,
ne'er can i be gay !
there my flocks feed
above the howling senses ' ebb and flow ,
to our brook 's familiar bend .
from the safe shore their floating carkases
" come quit the crowd and live with me ! "
to make that sorrowing heart forget its pain .
that morbid old man of vesuvius .
and every gentle bosom beat
which melts from curve to curve ,
like some fair phantom which we do not dread !
" an i could climb and lay my hand upon it ,
the brooks to murmur , and the birds to sing.--pope .
with shriek of shafts and snapping short of bows ;
from within the tubs of birchwood ,
fie , there 's a sulky look .
mau gwawdgan _ afan _ , ufuddfryd ffrwythlawn ,
with careless eye
but tom 's no more -- and so no more of tom .
recompense ; had a room to himself , to which he could at any time
house unrifted was there none .
mozart 's , rossini 's , weber 's melodies , -
then come home and fodder them ;
and endless happiness of thine own name
critics new rules .
were showed by tokens clear and manifest ,
i know i swore i 'd be no wife ,
o volet ex oculis illa venire tuis .
his heart it will not cease to beat ,
from the fire of ancient magic ;
quien duerme en español y sueña en griego ,
on musical hinges swung before me .
sang a pond upon the flooring ,
even as he thinks , the lust that is no more
henceforth hold my hands from slaying , ere the wooers had
nec tamen ignauo stupuerunt uerba palato :
magnificent with gold . lycaon made ,
beyond the sea -- behold it ,
tarred and feathered and carried in a cart
which for the mighty sultan bore a treasure .
hieing
' tis so for both , it seems to me .
in the foot - prints of the workmen ,
when i see you which god send , may be soon . "
but custome wil'd that he should now returne ,
from the copper - bearing mountain . "
and what can glow , so brightly glow ,
they had a likely son ,
the royal tyrant on his purple throne ,
the lamb of god who taketh sins away ,
alone fulfill the law ; thy punishment
while beneath her groping hands
but the word that sways , and stirs , and stays ,
and told him that the dinner waited .
that the boys and maidens knew not
hector this heard , return’d without delay ;
the lion and the unicorn were fighting for the crown
what sight worth seeing could i see ?
i shall never , never leave thee
hath royally informed and crowned
sweet company in the brooks , and loved to sit
to blot the era of oppression out ,
come , vicar , lay your feuds aside ,
a perfume forth -- like those the houris wave
like unto thine , from of old , springeth the spirit of man,--
" what shall we do to those who wish us ill ,
through the shaken night i stole ;
she rose and once again , with noiseless tread ,
that thought away , turn , and with watchful eyes
come hither , the dances are done ,
and after salius again another space is left ,
ere the pigmy full unfolding ,
o merope , the trouble on thy face
just as upon his head it sat ,
while yet the dawn is dim ,
" when days are long , folks talk more stuff !
to be at home dishonourably undone ?
but find a charmer here at home ,
she lay near where the shadows lie
as though they caught a broken clue ;
associations .
of their great agony , wrung out from this
season of mists and mellow fruitfulness ,
for the boat , the swelling water ;
tempestuous beacons ; and , with gates hurled back ,
gentle sir , although to marry i design--
one muse embraced , and married for his life .
received by the critics , have survived the test of nine editions .
then seems , descending , but to skim the ground :
the clamour of them thrills us , and their blast .
open to view , and wretched ventricle ,
i 'll cop me prize an ' long in vain no more .
they near the margin stray ;
new england 's scaffold , and the priestly sneer
aye , thou art death
( these with a gathered mist saturnia shrouds ,
qual su dolce liuto
when round about the hill the sun shall swim
what hues particular my joys enhance .
for their smells .
no more the beaked prows dashing
about whose throne the crowd of poets throng
each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold ;
and to - night i want the best .
stabb’d at the sight , deiphobus drew nigh ,
king nimaera on his throne sat
looked up gravely from his labor ,
give thou my sacred reliques burial .
as from our shoulders falls a load of death
thy life till fourteen years shall end ” —
gloom of hell , or of night deprived of every planet , under a
with my little bare feet from my own mother 's knee
of one who hurt no friend and spared no jest .
to the salvation of the vest ,
at the church on the hill - side--
as if to entice the stars at night
and yet the devil can not make it .
where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees ,
thus speaking , the trooped apparitions
for fifty years she ’s been to us
if you are safe beyond their rage
no banners theirs , no beat of drum ,
could trumpeter michael be so brave ? '
as much as from the other half he 's ta'en ,
and ye must choose to live , to love , to learn .
make the reeds and grasses rustle ,
through many woes and wanderings , do i come
by saint neot , ye wot well what i mean . "
( and the winds are a - coming from the west ) ,
little gods , who murder sleep !
my godlike master , and his fatted swine
call thee to come and save :
and the deep ton'd organ swells
speak out , an ' never fash your thumb !
be suggested by the action of what is sometimes called the first
while some are from high station hurled
his little darling six years old .
geffe me they clothyng , and thow schalt hafe myne ;
_ the picture palace ! _ aye , in sooth
there is a lively club together :
thrice , in the eloquence of grief he utter'd ;
a phenix , & in chastest flames of loue
but for _ t’heroic _ watchman at calversyke hill .
gleams through the smoke ; loud shouts astound the ear .
still in a corner shine the sun ,
in conversation with the lord ,
let loose the ocean that is in thee pent ,
then shall my smiling mouth refuse :
it 's winter when the summer seem'st so good ,
the youthful damsel doubts some little space ;
an ' man on man got talkin '
your roos galloped bravely , the fault 's not in her ,
at length was love , because it was so sad
th ' alarmed beetle sounds his bugle horn ;
marshal to them was dankwart , / a knight of burgundy full true .
they mould the noblest living head ;
while we two ride together ?
for whose hand thou hast been absent ?
i used all the gasconnade
of the moon 's consummate apparition .
still gathers .   " son , " thus spake the courteous guide ,
twelue forlonge space er eu{er } hit fon ,
thick round me in the teeming mud
hands an ' says :   " oh , dear ,
refers to the holiday - presents in vogue at the time .
not that any tale he meant
with this arrow hunt the white doe ,
still i shall envy no man 's lot ,
and then he laughed , but only
my love is gone , my life 's sweet spring ;
for it was morgane 's realm , embowered gore ;
free only to ruin , and strong but to blight !
crawls to the cliff - side and looks down ,
the eyes , still won by whatsoe'er was bright ,
his numerous band all mourn'd at once the dead .
i ruled the hearts of earth 's primaeval kings ,
speeding past the rocky island , steadfast as a sentinel ,
glory narrowing to grace ,
from thence , still on , our daring course we hold
but mingle with the vulgar dead ,
she sang , her sweet voice filled the gay garden alleys ;
" then , ye boasted works of men !
whose tones are tuned for peace : with martial tongue
down sinks the sun behind the lofty pines
give ear unto my words , and thou shalt cull
in every doughty deed , ha ha !
remarked again that in his proper judgment ,
but when at length the slayer treads us low ,
at that one blow dissever'd , not focaccia ,
the friends , so linked together ,
here delicate snow - stars , out of the cloud ,
that waits to dress us , arbitrates their date ,
warre 's ratling tumults , or some tyrant 's fall .
by humility outvied ?
to frenzy ; and i watched him , with a sneer ,
i show my rainbow , [ as proof ] that i will certainly keep
ah ! could i control
i 've bled them every one .
and that when the former presented the kentish petition , and was
of art array'd in fairest guise
blown with white wings , for a token , to me !
no dark forebodings or remorse to - morrow !
their downward sweep a moment stayed
landless king ?
" _ for this i came -- to bear you company . _ "
the gods are good to me :   i have no wife ,
from the high belfry
" et jam summa procul villarum culmina fumant ,
whose the war - ship sailing hither ? "
if you have been a reader ;
his cheeks cloath'd only with their earliest down ,
flowers of all hue , and without thorn the rose :
mid flash and clap ; and when the sable skies
the farmer passing eyes it ;
in his flaming seat in the sky :
the night is mother of the day , 174 .
they 're the funniest thing in the world , i know !
nor trust alone to penitence and prayer ,
then took his rod , wherewith he seals at will
sae fu ' o ' the damask wine ,
after each other , next their forces stirred ;
" our speed shall o'ertake my father 's flight
what leads us there ? the hidden path where bent
pour quick , that the fluid that feeds the bell
so have i power over these ,
casual fruition ; nor in court - amours ,
the covent was clothed in graye .
to fall beneath the tempter 's art!--
with thankful hearts , each day , each night ,
the fragrance of the breathing flowers
three fatal sparks , have set the hearts of all
in frenzied haste , and the nurse went with her carrying the
or helps the ambitious hill the heavens to scale ,
and nature sleeps on the sterile plains ,
to spend this wild december night
whom gently eros shooteth , and apart
yet undiscover'd treasure . what i can ,
a church , a street , that soon or late
descending from his place , bade clear the way ;
candida tu , et partu semper tibi concolor omni :
powdered with stars .   and now on earth the seventh
thy tender form .
were there nae speerings of our mungo park--
when the kye comes hame , & c.
caze de " hants " is comin ' ' round .
for i did n't knaw their ways ;
i hoped that he would love me ,
so thick beset with thorns and briers ?
he looks around so sneeringly ,
and , oh , but the soothering ways he had ,
" weave the warp , and weave the woof ,
the rattling quiver sound : thus speeding clouds
i drive my chariot up to the eastern gate ;
ruling with a sway unquestioned
his vats , and tubs , and hops , and hogsheads famed ,
and there he lived exceedingly at ease ;
the slow archangel 's syllables
the future lord of yon domain ,
the lion mounted on the prow ,
and rarely in our borders may you meet
he , in celestial panoply all armed
may nip the clover round its nest ;
woven by the moon 's fair daughters ,
and smoking a small white cigar , he said :
tell us upon what side the mountain slopes ,
see me sailing with surprise .
ere his own lips could say , ' be still ! '
i little thought , when first we met ,
ráma and lakshmaṇ lead their bands ,
two handfuls of white dust , shut in an urn of brass !
and the dark menace of the distant war .
but in that moment dire the archer did not quail .
hush , beating heart of christabel !
or , changed at length , and to the place conformed
springs a flower unknown among us ,
grew to tremble , but her voice was
and shield for battle . mothers , pale with dread ,
" to hear thy angel eloquence -- to see
with gentle invitation to explore
" up ! " cried the son of siegelind , " more will be yet to do ,
nay , see thee in the basement taking tea--
no more in dust and ashes seen .
_ copyright , 1907 , by _ forbes and company
imprison me with those white arms of thine .
he woke from sleep ; but o'er his senses spread
stand with their leafy pride unfurled ;
the great , cool sailing ships blown softly by ,
_ fidele 's grassy tomb _
the advice that i gave you--
while zoned about the belt of each
and , as a god , but now encounter'd me :
haste , thou sluggard , hence to flee
they rose in rude but fierce array , with sabre , pike and _ scian _ ,
methinks were fitter instruments for thee ,
apples still fondly ye desire ,
how did you , peter , when ne'er on his breast
jane -- a woman .
thou know'st her not , o rustling tree !
( charles answered ) , " and i to content thee swear ,
like and lost as leaf and leaf .
in hawthorn - time the heart grows light ,
of me there )
sir axel and his damsel good
i take the wound , and die at venus ' foot .
known as lou .
the flesh forgets its pale and wandering fires ;
and listen , john , how sweet it sings .
earth has room enough for all .
and ere they dream what he 's about ,
it was a world of watery shapes and hues and wizardry .
he follows nature ( not like thee ) and shows us
which saw the messenger of tidings glad ,
the crinching snow
scilicet et tempus ueniet cum finibus illis
looking dreamily and sadly ,
when march winds brought vague rumors of the spring ,
the common interest , or endear the tie .
burning out into the aether ,
peep from the thickets ; shy ,
in circuit , undetermined square or round ,
and spear poised high above her . / so did the contest start .
in no extreme lies real happiness ,
night ’s sombre mantle is spreading the plain .
wealders and workmen . "
that he can only weep ;
attend not to the fashion of the torment ,
a while her weeping then was stayed ,
all power well nigh extinct : or , from direct
when he , to bring us to the heavenly fold ,
turn'd round his head , where his feet stood before ,
think you would n't do .
but in the liquid light where she doth hide ,
and passed away . i crave at length
if i 've luck , sir , she 's my uxor ,
like to a flame grown moderate :
wi ' tidings o ' damnation .
in the uncertainty of dizzy dreams
in taking up this paltry sheet of paper ,
while the golden moon is shining .
gatherer of hosts to battle , nor herself
' twixt life and death , ' twixt in and out .
they soon ran off with a true coward 's leer ,
by mound and stone and tree
yet jenny 's modest dress and look must bear away the bell ! "
luck favours him , his whole life through ;
then chris , what must i say of him ,
far from the sun and summer gale ,
as hate , i 'd tear in shreds the infernal web !
myriad - voiced queen ,
" sae white an ' pure an ash .
promisd to abraham and his seed : the rest
his opening hand in death forsakes the rein ;
but are modell'd , alas!--
but for the real manna , soon he grew
whose virgin charms subdued the god of war :
the little maid replied ,
we shall stand in that to - morrow
nor fell the blaze upon the ships alone ,
on torno 's cliffs , or pambamarca 's side ,
an air of coolness plays upon his face ,
for now on foreign strand he waits
abundantly in lynn and elsewhere ; and i have seen , in the
and others on their arms relied .
wait for a riper age to touch the chord
a little time shall show you which way my design tends ,
say , ed ! lend me eighty dollars
the pains , the ills we 've wept thro ' here
and he before his cottage door
" each headstone of the quire , each mound ,
nor care beyond to - day :
give life to this dark world which lieth dead ;
said with gentle look and accent ,
moiled for its gold .
on the small waves float and quiver ,
till some afoot did tidings bear
moved by one universal impulse , urged
long war for so much beauty . oh , how like
nor fondness for my son , nor reverence
burst on my ear seraphic harmonies ?
which sounds , from fields beyond my range ,
she set upon her rocky brow
unnotic'd streams her cobra's[b ] margin lave
in the heart , lock up and put away
i , lost in pity , was wellnigh undone .
inaugurates a green and gold
but then , tom has a “ snap”,--
than loch mcgarry in the highlands .
den bring me a peck o ' meal .
i shall never again be friends with ' rolies , '
of sorrow , or of reverence ?
that thei the whiche named were
my hate 's hyenas slouching ,
when the clouds hide the sun away
strange birds called to me flashing by .
was , that the husband little wit possest ,
thou that destroyest the temple , and dost build it
strange how all these voices called us!--
true is it , who in contumacy dies
by which to carry off a _ prize _ .
and wistful yet for being cheated ,
surely that stream was unprofaned by slaughters--
that all things hold of deity .
a man would say " would i were dead ! "
and i carried it back although weary and cold ,
i view that noble , stately dome ,
lent ear .   i wonder what it will be this time , " she said to
then was the rite begun with care :
the garden suddenly was glorified ;
for him the monarch 's wife , antaea , nurs'd
the earth brings forth its grain ;
i feel a youthful , holy , vital bliss
yea , his deserter ; and came to wonder
but all in vain ;
characteristics of a child three years old
wainamoinen , old and hopeful ,
that " we must include ἀθροτάζειν among the forms of άμαρτάνω ,
and opens all her secrets to their view !
on a white heal - all , holding up a moth
would drink and doze at tooting or earl 's court .
o'er rough and smooth she trips along ,
but ancient friends ( though poor , or out of play )
only one daughter heirs my crown and state . ]
wrapped in a ragged shawl ;
ah , friend of mine , how goes it
this at least -- that with blight and with blessing
to be partaker of one smile of thine ,
and after him the darkness pines ;
my own dear saviour , on the cross ,
far off , from the threshing - floors
poor child , thou art almost as pale as i ;
dreamers of dreams , indeed , were we--
say over again , and yet once over again ,
to god , and hopes a crown to win .
says from under its lid ,
what time the herald and the hoary king
and still the centre of his cheek
two thousand five hundred inhabitants , was overwhelmed in 1618 by
none cared whatever crash or cross
that only this one earth and sky of ours
ever the cry that a hand will save ,
thou art like unto a flower ,
but till that comes , i 'll bless the rules
bedecked with bays and rosemary ;
a happy thought to thee .
note each megalithic boulder ;
altera floret humus , alterq ; vagantia lætus
all selfish feelings ! i would have it so .
from deeps of feeling never stirr'd by shame ,
thine be ilka joy and treasure ,
and when you are n't thinking about them at all ,
in his despite , his bridge he also laid ,
or think they favour not the senate 's cause ?
grounds , the animals which fed upon them ascended the heights of
of alle ther is non so good ,
at night - time languish ,
oh , never child in all the world
sugríva heard : he bowed his head :
good decreed by the creator ,
which knows all kinds of things —
of knightly counsel , and heroic deed )
never again , perhaps , shall i
old goodman 's farm is rank sea - sand ,
still by him , his strict judge in the last days .
and faint aerial hue
in the hands of the porter , curlypate ,
and in the rush of sun and glittering cloud
and angels talk such idiocy .
and if thou hearest it he will hear it .
surroundings new , and curious faces ,
he changed his innocent laughter and sweet play .
chicanery balks all effort that atones ,
where was stayed your greatness ' proud career
thy bosilka pillage .
over the roof ,
for he hated high colors -- except on his nose ,
' twas far away and long ago ,
unseen by man 's disturbing eye,--
or some other 's that he sings ?
to laugh at him , to blush for thee ;
peals the dire clang of arms , and loud and clear ,
tapering oars . but i paced the ship and cheered on my men ,
sufren que passen | males e viçios ... ( str . 232 )
laid down their lives for glory
my way was wrong .   so .   would it mend
with three great earls king guthrum
i nefer yet did see .
aerfleidd arwreidd o _ eryri _ ,
shamefully abused ,
who would not sing for lycidas ? he knew
with old virginia 's very best .
vestris , called ' vestris the first . ' after extraordinary success
o , my pure soul , what have you been to me ,
but for that happy moment he yet had long to wait .
as one who from the knife of torture swerves ,
but the cold light of stars ;
" ah , kaween ! " said mudjekeewis ,
so jump into the wagon ,
knowledge , the thing known , and the mind which knows ,
will be every moment musical
it trembles at betrayal of a sore .
but said with a blessing , go !
like a drowned man 's length on the strong flood - tide ,
of tir and di have overturned upon the earth a thousand
and the wrangling ,
with half - dropped eyelids still ,
“ come , ” lakshmaṇ cried , “ assay the fight :
father was killed by the drink ;
around my fire an evening group to draw ,
bodies and breasts and earth and skies !
what the anvil ? what dread grasp
some hid in caves and chattered mad with fear
woe to thee !
let the hoar - frost fall and settle .
a nature of gaunt ribs , an earth of crags .
good spirits hovered near , almost
eva bemoaned her fault : " what must they think--
unblest , to vex me with his father 's eyes !
a sign for the talk to begin .
the white heat pales the skies from side to side ;
one million and five hundred thousands of souls .
most holy feelings in his bosom glowed
struggles with the aid of magic ;
here lies a youth , whom death 's resistless power ,
he clasped her close,--what else had done
but his cheek was deadly pale ;
here olde sennes to amende :
you know the old hidalgo
let us let the gentle wind ,
pelvis being firmly knit together in manner somewhat resembling
was in his old , full - skirted coat .
quae pueri in tenebris pauitant finguntque futura .
day in which wine makes you joyous is more precious
who the law of the romans professed ,
' thus we sat there the livelong day until the going down of
were announcing the marriage of yiada ,
for on a time the sheepe , to whom of yore
his wishful eyes
hot as the brackish waifs of yellow spume
" let her fall in well , and perish ,
how deepest wounds are given by praise ,
jus ' for twenty cent one po'nd .
past the silence reaching ,
he saw , weighed down by woe and care ,
which my unerring memory shall retrace .
take me with you as your comrade ,
bend to my hermitage our way . ”
partition leagues and deeds of devilishness !
the five - points ' poet , has outdone
" for in him the heart of a woman combined
your eyesight with his semblance foul and stern !
what care i for whom she be ?
and feels the constellations .   no coarse sense
a white sigh clouds the fields
an isle is on our left - hand ; and to me
then , amidst broken sighs and wafts of song ,
þen hurled on a hepe þe helme & þe sterne
his face is growing sharp and thin .
and two yellow satin bows
knowing only pain and trouble !
suffers worse pain where thicker fumes arise ;
round , vast , and spanning all , like saturn 's ring ?
sprung to their car ; and with united pains
harmful in heart and hated of god ,
we be all too tired to boast
nor tear the foemen from their steeds .
when long thoughts come back with twilight ,
the thunder crumbled like a stuff --
touch once more a sober measure , vol . iii . , 178 .
life which the very stars reprove
with trees on either hand .
_ faust _ . ah rogue , how sly thou art !
large , slow ,
" the little green leaves would not let me alone in my sleep,"*17 *
the last new play and fritter'd magazine .
a light which doth dissever
oh , fair straight brows that brood above
va á rezar , hija mía . ya es la hora
thou shalt have the first advantage ;
desart and bare , unsightly , unadorned ,
thy silver passages of sacred lands ,
alanna !   alanna !   the mountain side is bare ,
but when the piper me did greet ,
always the yell of the hun !
wind from the sight in brightness , and are lost
name each nice change appulsive powers supply
the pathless wild , and wimpling burn ,
away -- for hated by the gods thou com'st .
canto xciii . chitrakúta in sight .
for what was mainly his mistake ;
sometimes successful he may be ,
a foolish jest !
and warbled many a lay ,
and the joy of song
oh , sharper tangs pierced through this perfumed may .
patroclus . he stood up and said among the argives , " we bid two
where the daisies are rose - scented ,
swift daylight kills it , and no trump of war
" oh , greet nae mair , jeanie ! " said he , wi ' a groan ;
let me enjoy but thee , what further crave i ?
that their land is bright and they weep no more ,
like tufts of dandelion gone to seed ,
to deathless pain ?   how gladly would i meet
luckily for me , i was prevented from the discussion of the knotty
  the original of this story may be found in the book called
truth , wisdome , sanctitude severe and pure ,
progress                       _ robert bulwer lytton _
all seem’d as they wor flyin ’ ;
they , though to others no releife ,
we joined a mourning train , that held their way ,
when uttered in hessians ,
he must be in a pretty good way .
the murmur of the falling floods .
no ; the bond of affection would stay , dear ,
drink ! for you know not whence you came , nor why
that the heart grows old ?
among the bed - clothes , through the hills ;
do you , for some glad day ,
' tis virtue calls!--i must away!--
' thou southmost point , ' the joyful king exclaim'd ,
go forth preach justice ! preach truth ! "
the secret of the seed-- the germ .
not bays and broad - armed ports ,
perque mathematicum pelagus , loca turbida , anhelat .
ef i hark to a word frum so noted a pest ;
reach beyond reach all down the valley gleamed,--
wi ’ its little lappels hangin ’ down ower mi waist ,
her mad dear magic to undo ?
curse consistently at wives ?
his panicked watchers spy us , a droning threat in the void ;
robert of lincoln 's quaker wife ,
which , at a single stroke , lopt off the head ;
new eras blot there
“ sprung out ; his jaws terrific , smear'd with foam
in the paths , ' mid honeysuckle ,
cold , cold is his hearth - stone ,
and ascends , multitudinous and at one
or beauheu spoils a curry :
montereggione , xxxi . 40 .
the night bends over , weeping . in the street
speak , mighty lord , whom all revere ,
before me ; everything seems clear and easy , as it seems
with tho wommen who s innocence
and come from out the cold and gloom
with tristram even to death :   his strong hands gript
' life is good , and joy runs high
impartial mars hath oft the slayer slain . "
flinging us sharply up against a fight
it isna gowd , it isna gear ,
« ¡ eh ! no por cierto . »
might comfort the soul of the dona ;
of mightie peeres true wisedome to sustaine ,
the shining lustre of their fame
for this man who comes with me , and bears yet
stand before her like a rampart ,
not him , who headlong fell from thebes .   he fled ,
that grace he long resisted , how did it plead in vain !
not from the dust the muse transcribes his name ,
he has used his own sinews himself to distress ,
" the clouds of hell alarm me less
gods of my birthplace , dæmons and heroes , honour to all !
then , girt with guards , within the temple 's gate
to light the way to shadowtown .
city , or now that they have worsted the achaeans , will they
nor the fragments in the water ,
alone she cuts and binds the grain ,
who so can suffre is founden remedye
like a cloud of fire ;
monstrously when the future brings
reserve , that we may learn whether achilles shall kill us and
dim in the east there burns a new - born sun ,
knew all of every secret pain
english soldiers never carry
then thou wilt beg as i beg thee:--
seas to sail for england
whose uncomputed legions squirm
at war ' twixt will and will not in my thoughts .
he now , as then , with words of power and peace ,
dat dey good de possum know ,
those eyes compassionless , of syrinx hearing ,
or were i cursed with an unfruitful bed ,
but when he was just about to reach the high promontory of
which you ( and i ) know is a god - given thing
a good deal comes on me when all is said .
he turned in his bed ; she was there again !
the starry pole ,
for george the vandal shares the throne ,
its strings , which he struck with a falcon 's feather .
she dared not speak ; and , shuddering , he turned ,
that by his rams , his ewes , his lambs , australia was made
i would resign fair india 's wealth ,
wild , stormy month , in praise of thee ;
far from his throne he steals away
" put up the steel at your sides !
_ ultimum vale , or the third book of airs _ , 1608 .
  _ schermo della veritade_,--natural philosophy .
the physic stands ,
over fire - scorched fields of stubble ;
mutamur atque nos , "
vas carven eagles on de shore ,
for every clear night
such a flourishing , fine , clever woman was she ,
" lay on him the curse of the withered heart ,
her viewless presence near us , unafraid ?
the moon shines down on the sleeping birds .
with tale of ancient auxiliar cities ,
pardons denied to creatures in the wrong ;
for lakshmaṇ , when the eye can trace
the boat rocks at the pier o ' leith ,
the selection of astronomy as one of the subjects in which milton
he seide , his swerd lay faste by
aire , and ye elements the eldest birth
at the close of one of these martial exercises , old rolf advanced
a living shrine , a ' house of bread , '
but they no groves nor grassy mountains tread ,
pok - ka'nen .    the frost , the son of puhuri ; a synonym of tiera .
" not hid , " quoth she , " but quite consumed with flame ,
that moans and sighs a hundred days :
" when you return , i shall be here , " she said ,
and what shall the pictures be that i hang on the walls ,
downy - back said , " yes , " and thistle , thanking the kindly flowers ,
and then , anon , i see her on the knee
i passed your street of many memories .
in the blue waters of heaven ,
while she , too gentle even to force
leading young hope through lemuel 's fabled lands?--
he who enjoys , nor covets more ,
in other climes less fatal .   next he seeks
he saw the nameless , glorious things
to gardens trim in gay attire
' dear father , what can honour be ,
but the end of this , alas ,
which well must be as ye can see--
and unto the woe i chanted ,
round which the tape rolls
number , with some regard of the accent , the chief life of it
and follow thee , that we may also rouse
as bright as the golden poppy is
  bowles himself had a low opinion of the " system of philosophy "
teasle and tansy , meadowsweet ,
from heaven 's high jurisdiction , in new league
_ spirit _ . who calls upon me ?
there lurkt one wretch among the few
no doubt you 'll be modern enough
when the king sees the light at even fade ,
steals from his misty prison ;
i knelt with pain -- reached out my hand -- had grasp'd
to the storting 's rallies
a calm stagnation , that were bliss
i had lever than a thousande pounde ,
a tone which is now forever fled ,
' mid the shadows so dark and deep .
“ here dryopé , of fate unconscious came ,
there , too , to - day her knee she bows ,
to win the foe , to bribe , or part .
" italica ! " from ruined tower and wall .
that they gave easy conquest to their foes ;
they bear in roasted flesh of bulls , and high the baskets lade
bear it firmly by the handles ,
yes , something more .   an island , with the sea
anywhere , and his eyes grew weary , peering about at the mist - like
on his wasted form and features ,
thy mate , the king thou always longest for ,
then when he saw the queen , embracing asked ,
curse thou his basket and his store ,
of all thy great things done
great , indeed , must be the changes
long life to thee , sir titus ,
of all the men of her consideration ?
ancient liberties , by surprising the conqueror like a mouing
in that same godhead he had harboured there :
his glorious colours , and his glistering eies .
it were my punishment to be with them
the monarch 's spear was thrust ; nor aught avail'd
in a terrible tomb . "
tour turban set with alien stars and sweet .
company themselves to mount , and to loose the hawsers . so
she drew gently . )   " trust to me ! " ( she said , with soft tone ):
and first , because from deep inside the thing
still somewhere the path must end.--
take the gag from his mouth .   good !   now scatter like devils
and its foes now scorn and brave it ;
and such as are pious , you well may believe ,
" i will get a new string for my fiddle ,
o for the owl that sees in the dark ;
wherewith the goodliest sapphire , that inlays
down in my lonesome gyardin .
but all her shining beauty
sons , phegeus and idaeus , both of them skilled in all the arts of
though in vain my tears fall,--
and jealousy would , now and then ,
it was not the pines , or the rout
and slowly rising , thus the council moved .
and if palace or cot ,
he laid aside ; and , here with us to be ,
in the ship 's deep churning the eerie phosphorescence
if thou stay not . " -- " my son ! "   he straight reply'd ,
_ tell it to the barrows of the dead -- run ahead !
snapping at roughnecks who made foolish howls ,
there 's shawls ye get
see not the phantoms all my substance sees !
we 're both polite and insincere :
hang her cage of earth out
no chilling forecast of doom in the future
i am sad in the spring
all kind of quadrupeds in their degree ,
said one : " the time is drawing near--
and certainly ne'er did a queerer or rummer set
happy hearts and happy faces ,
god conceals it from my sight ,
stop to shake their fists and curse ;
disposes both his hands so fair and white ,
of restless sense , and let the soul abide
with such a fixt devotion , that the old man ,
here moving with a silken noise ,
give me thy hand , come on .
and mark against elf yet shouting ,
where as he scholde londe , he londeth
to the ever - silent waters ,
for he sang , in tones impassioned , of the death
all oversteppings of the plumed ,
thou couldst for prayer like mine recall ,
like a miserable woman !
i care not if i die , for i coud meet--
the panting herds repose :
one blest hour we sat together in a lone and silent place ,
now i 'm vexed full sore .
rich mexico , the seat of montezume ,
what , was i dreaming ?
" o dat man is de bes ' who will cling to his nes '
o wife , our babes are very young ,
the sailor to the port !
thy path , thy purposes conceal
" he 's away at his deanery in carlisle . "--
you back to be all mine , for evermore . "
ever tinkling at her throat .
now with a gird he would his course rebate ,
will hodge for ever be ;
' nor shall it e'er by envious tongue be told
as kind and daring you appear in show ,
on the alarmed air .
all undisturbed by bell of muffin - man ,
conceal'd behind the whirling waters sav'd .
david , mr . punch 's neighbor ,
that hath this underworld so richly dight :
and live entire . death is the crown of life :
now borne on the night - breeze was wafted high ,
who , wandering here , made barren forests bloom ,
nay , little comfort , never more shall i
as pure , and soft , and sinless as thine own .
and shrink because the path to glory lies
' tis his to control ,
to occult learning in our lord the sage
and the dandiest of the whole blame push .
that he out of the pet him broghte ,
that the ionian seas a change
where they sing among the valleys ,
furiously burning , all on vengeance fierce
came back again for that ! before it left ,
i wish the happy time were nigh ,
to set my face for mesched with the dawn .
of clytius , lest the grecians of his arms
but i am old ; me list not play for age ; < 2 >
they flake us sometimes
in east and west lift up thy voice ,
from her haunts among the fen - lands ,
a time discrowned of doom and birth ,
instinctively to represent his spiritual intuition to the surface
think of my friend that was of late so gay ,
that melts the fogs in limpid air ,
a world of sorrow in the patient face ,
shook with the gladness of a day begun ;
nicolás fernández de moratín ( 1737 - 1780 ) followed the
the thighs thus offer'd , and the entrails dress'd ,
of what has been , in blissful sleep .
thou shalt rejoice to find me altered — i ,
sabbata pango !
but since these armies , from the world 's end brought ,
a brooding practice - ground for blood - red war .
is but a sparkling ray , a shadow - light !
what puny hand thy giant arm can stay ?
preserve your tales , for , when all else fails ,
a brimstone sunset . and at night
my muse repelled : no poesy of mine
gleamed forth as if the light
is wan on neptune 's blue : yet there 's a stress
' twas thine love 's tender sense
in weary ways where heavy shadows be .
and shadow - of - a - leaf ?
and the bugle wild and shrill .
who drag no living utterance to their teeth ,
" this is what i wish for from thee ,
known in part by many heroes ,
down behind the purple hillside
tyranny 's wrongs must cease ,
for traditions of that day ;
this lucky moment the sly traitor chose :
condens'd in air ; so piercing through the gross
he touched her hand . it leapt quickly away .
often the soul , now tottering from some cause ,
to blame his fellow for aught he be ? "
the vayne glasse ( of theyr beautye ) to apose
think ; wilt thou let it
in the deep night , that all is well . "
sever from self , and occupy with thee !
when i rest within my chamber ,
when i can see , though distant still , thy light ,
that golden time again .
raphael , the sociable spirit , that deign'd
by the field where the young corn dies
hide ;
but hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit ;
my jesus , as thou wilt :
afford . remember , however , as you have not chosen any longer to
for this at least be science praised
as near as near could be , man ;
so full of lively play--
fair as the summer 's self she stood , and smiled ,
have i found , dear maurice , such a treasure in you ?
my spouse , nancy . "
how the burgundians fought with the huns
" so , haply , when thy task shall end ,
trees of the forest , and the open field !
things of sweet shape and of sweet savour
came riding downe with might and main ;
" hurrah ! boys , the morning of battle is come ,
" let us again go farther . " " farther ? farther ?
amonges othre that ther were
which will give speedy motion to the pen ,
so looks the parting loved - one , when
was as a fire upon a hearth ;
turns not , but swells the higher by this let .
so lived he till his eightieth year was past .
of knowledge , what this vessel can contain ;
for , oh , the music stirs my blood as once it did before ,
receives a letter from a new york friend ,
how shall i tell you ? can you think of fields
hath told the men of gorukh .   thence the tale
and turns the woe of night ,
to vindicate his purpose in our life :
the flowers are servants to the pilgrim bees ,
come into the garden , maud ,
thy will always ;
one day through drone of locusts fell
and still it rang that wee bird 's song ;
thine eyes are full of tears ;
i doubt a lover somewhere .   what shrewd bee
when slow consumption led with fatal bloom
bannocks o ' barley ;
but brought her here with cruel speed
how i envied and envied him !
and yet couldst leave the cottage , spurred
mind in peace as aforetime , for greatly do i fear me that you
with a hey , dolly ! ho , dolly !
the wandering bee to love me ,
how he , the mighty agamemnon , fell ;
and fanning us , affirm'd that those , who mourn ,
' they tell me ' t is decided ; you depart :
scarce breathing , he awaits the morrow 's sun .
will rise with other years , till man shall learn
above these quick and dead ,
he got him forth into the night ,
in full - orb'd glory yonder moon divine
blighting , ah ! blighting .
i hadna been his wife a week but only four ,
and henceforth shall ev'ry spirit
scores . we bet
our sons will come with fiddles and with loot ,
part thus , then -- forever , lucile ?   is it so ?
he caught what is vulgarly known as a " crab " :
at the glow - worms and the marsh lights and the lightning - bugs ,
for this , of jove ’s superior might afraid ,
you shall not chafe!--the fiend direct my ball ! "
answers him guenes : " i know ; ' tis true in - deed . "
lived , and ran the race that nature set
o'er wandering brooks and springs unseen ,
his face was like a berry .
those whom they know .   my fate is in the hands
thinks that something ill has happened
what have you to eat ?
good lord , deliver us !
of souls that struggle and toil in vain
and then that all the tartar host would praise
renowned and rich , while priam held command ,
care for thy corpse ( body ) , but chiefely for soules sake ,
now my hope has found fulfilment ;
rolled through the black concave ;
by raghu ’s son were overthrown ,
and , in a moment , all was war ,
caze ole man ned , he know how to run ,
was sleeping upon the skin of an ox , with a piece of fine carpet
i thought to have return'd welcome to all ,
how touching was the simple strain ! the tear
since half our battle 's won ,
a grain of glory mixed with humbleness
when the death - angel touches those swift keys
the hung head , the sunken eye ,
god give us men ! a time like this demands
then spake the valiant wolfhart : / " thither will i run
the symbol of maidens--
and hence to a new home.--such were his words ,
and this sufficient be of the first valley
embroider'd vestures , gold , and brass , are laid
and this same flower that smiles to - day ,
and upturns the hunter 's hurdle ,
we 've paid in our toil and our woundings ;
o thou , without beginning , without end ,
they do on me , poor woman . / what were i unto one ,
when the mild eve by sudden night is pressed
once shone as contributor , lord ! how he 'd quiz you !
beyond the darkening ocean burn'd
and busily all the night
then , rolling back , the powers of troy opposed
no , lady , no ; my heart longs not to groan ,
at length i played them one as frank,--
in the coarse drudgeries , and sinks of sense ,
the same tyme , and lasten til a - morwe ;
glows in the bosom .   my insatiate eyes
of a ship that goes a - sailing on the pond ;
o cromwell 's england ! must thou yield
kabîr gives utterance to the words of experience ; and he knows
blows his trumpet .
their mama sent away
yet better die by the franks than flee .
turn my song to other heroes ,
down , and half drown'd me with the same ;
th ' entrancing raptures of th ' approaching night ,
to england to carry ;
“ mov'd him at length ; and glory with his blood
sculking , the scandal privately disperse ,
what 's in the house ?
life 's endless toil and endeavor ;
and by this beneficial chance
' i 'll get him snug on board , and then i think ,
matters are much as they were before ,
appear to wake , and shadows wild and quaint
in the pathway i would travel ?
in the things they make or buy
into the street the piper stept ,
and offering his cup invite our souls
and each one got the proper christmas - present .
cloridan , who to aid him knows not how ,
or cranny for escape !   oh , it was sad !
i 'll pay you like my master .
the mill - wheel hung at rest ;
for eu’ry vse a marriner could name ,
its amorous dalliance with my lady 's looks ,
an ' at his lordship steal't a look ,
on the third evening , as the shadows fall ,
canto xxvi . the coronation .
a grey , old fancy often sits
when she was aware of a knight so fair ,
lifting on high , with hands unstained ,
then on the gilded track leading to the mountains ,
they held their pilgrim way .
he was not by birth a _ ker_--the family name of the house of
and wisdom of the east ,
still shouting with his utmost breath ,
and slung athwart his shoulders , bright emboss'd ,
the nights are long and brisk the gale ,
avert from whole peoples
just when it grew not fit to eat .
and yet they all united stand ,
but never an end of tears ,
dreary from dart - play      on dyngesmere .
old neleus gloried in his conquering son .
as much as ' twixt the third hour 's close and dawn ,
if , as swift says , in the most delicate mind
to give place to the new , on the great judgment day
victorio giner ( who probably introduced this strophe into
whenas a storm hath dimd her trusty guyde ,
who have been burdened with the cares which make
there a savage wolf created ,
where the wave beats it , on the oozy bed
not by man was it built , o'er the vastness to sweep ;
_ man ever had , whence groweth this despair _ .
while others , restless , wandered up and down .
" cease thy loud bugle 's clanging knell , "
if he knows all my cares .
constancy can be elate .
then little peters must be set to
in another host , who loves overmuch or hates overmuch .
the bells unseen loud swelled ,
a full account of what we look upon .
sent for the partner of his realms of snow ;
her father , king lear , this while
crush the dire author of his country ’s woe . "
the picture of a dusty worm so dry
great hector saw , and , raging at the view ,
sweet sounds rose slowly through their mouths ,
echo to great neptune 's call ,
something he may recall , some counsel give ,
  sinister , that is , temporal .
melissa hitting all we saw with shafts
that did engender them and give them birth .
in half my ships now out at sea .
sonorous as with all the spheres in chime
i praise dim hair that worthiest is of praise
where lay the newly dead ,
of all this toil ? he journeys on his way
as her form , and that her spirit lives in the picture . so i
" death ! damnation ! that these men--
deil take me if i do !
till , now , on the stroke of midnight ,
the wounds of labour healed ,
the flood may bear me far ,
remember carroll 's sacred trust ,
and heart meets heart and i can sympathize .
i shall sit there in the corners looking on
here lies , now a prey to insulting neglect ,
and his the hand to hold the builder 's line ;
fire ; and ω . 413 ; of the body of hector , ἀλλ ' ἔτε κεῖνος κεῖται .
should sing aright to him the lowliest song ,
his child 's blood .
si cui fama fuit per auita tropaea decori ,
their leaven'd cakes , and fillets for my hair .
swung like a pendulum above the fire ,
through the mosses bare ,
who -- h'm -- will hardly thank you for your pains .
damsel 's jesting , woman 's mocking ,
mit fee und faw on de foe und fum !
till he reached the blue - sea 's margin ,
and , while she laughs at them , forgets
who thus hath promis'd , "   and i pointed to him ;
alive , in equal flames of love they burn'd ,
that will not after ,
refresh'd in that soft baptism , and reborn ,
and the sooty faces , they try to recall ....
thy lovers withering , as thy sweet self grow'st .
in mystic glee the echo free
from the dismal sariola ?
“ from that to this , from this to that again ;
take up , take up your burden of woe ,
for these craftes , as i finde ,
is all that is alive ;
galloping afar to where none knows .
olivier said , " ' tis a stirring fray . "
_ stech _ , to cram the belly .
if thou we 've known of late , art still the same ,
he who , from zone to zone ,
coachman , professor , but oh my eye !
_ o'er the black valley , demon shadows fleet . _
with a lapful of thy veinlets ,
  i wish i could feel convinced , with ayres , that the person whom
' mang sons o ' men .
meeting in certain regions of our thews ,
but mingled with a deep - down sweetness , too .
now doth me pleinly live or dye ,
and makes you feel happy
saw angel tracks the earlier earth upon ,
that you , your conscience blinding ,
on either bank of which a meadow lay ;
let us deal slaughter and doom 's darkness now !
all my past life is mine no more ;
into the burning lake thir baleful streams ;
with pressed lips as bloodless
the white rose whiter blow .
quick ! we have but a second .
' nay , for my lord , ' said percivale , ' the king ,
hold the whole scheme at once in mind !
do thou permit the chosen ten to gone
when in my heart it glows !
thither where the trees have fallen ,
unto his mate replying ,
which has in itself been voluminous .   since his first collection ,
with ev'ry wind , conspired to shade a brook ,
society , " may be summed up in a few words .   after the death of
their tumble , i should turn the other way ,
in council , by the sound alarm'd , their steeds
thinking thereof meseems my heart is clove .
dark strangers enter'd in the squalid cell ;
no law can call their free steps to our side .
the native heathen labouring in the breast !
and , save the flowing water 's peaceful voice ,
by agonizing demons thou art seen :
you , staring at your sword to find it brittle ,
o , my luve 's like a red , red rose
and asked , ' _ who _ woo'd yon fairhair'd bride , to leave ? '
from his wonderful enchantment .
there they would sometimes fight ,
" like bubbles in a frozen pond ;
by an impartial indemnification
who s tunge neither pyl ne crouche
of night as well as day ,
they 're rather limited on wreath--
me tell tem , me hae seen te day ,
in four days successive were scattered ' mongst the poor
lucid and clear , fresh emerald at the instant it is split ,
shall mark the roseate hues , which morning wore ,
over the ink - black cauldron of the sea ,
" did thy dear saints do more ?
and still their annals tell
that i can take the covenant
some note of nature 's music from his lips ,
and gratitude her exit make ,
fragments of woodland and whole branching trees ;
where the river the willow glasses .
then shouted loud lycaon 's noble son :
tarry ye now no longer in my house against your will ; but
and , bearing a young cypress root - uptorn ,
madrigals , and the very bow of the god of love , you will be soon
quick he takes his balm of healing ,
the silent streets between ,
i ' ve seen the day dawn in a shower - drappin ' goud ,
those fierce materials seem'd to be contagious ,
both to be blended in the urn
and tabor 's lonely mountain - side ,
nor force false grandeur from a brother 's toil .
alas ! i 'm but a nameless wight ,
nature and art one more
the land they died to save from death and shame
to labor until night .
who was the cause of failure ; in pursuit
and i 've seen the best , at that .
but _ pyramus _ like to a raging iudge ,
strip his misusëd thunderbolts from jove ;
and the thoughts he thinks and his every whim ;
and on that cheek the tints , that shame
again on his charger , through forest , o'er plain ,
over the carrion in the river bed ,
the roof they painted , and the beams they brac'd ,
imagine then you _ are _ what heretofore
nor asked my friends ’ consent . ”
as soon as we complete the circuit grim ;
a trifling failing here i must disclose ,
then leaped her cable 's length .
make not thyself a page
till suns of autumn dry the plain ,
son of laomedon ) ; from close at hand
thou hast died in troy , from phthia 's plains afar ,
" i 'd laugh if i had any list . "
_ kyo - ko _            " capital,"--metropolis .
of coach , or ca nt , or smoky link - boy 's call ,
that , when the heart fails , i may come and rest
thy god was still with thee .
she gave the danish wolf a grave
to feel that with the increase of our knowledge
first a page unto his highness
travellers , when another , to be raised above , will be exclusively
nor hope had they of crevice where to hide ,
as in a quiet and clear lake the fish ,
his path the dove nor favour'd nor forbade ;
the towers in different ages rose ;
these are the gates and these the sentries
he 's used ter me , and he knows , yer see ,
a poet , too , was there , whose verse
of dreamy waters , and the snow - white steer
before the suitors ; so to expose the more
little he gets by moving ; less than i.
but i would dig or almost starve ,
and the sailors who pace their midnight watch ,
and worn by weakness , disease , and wrong ,
there breathe but o'er my arch of grass
meekly , her gentle rule , and frowned no more .
departs from paris sore against his will .
onward aye , a thing of might ;
and does she regret -- if regret dust can -
from thy lamenting , and lay up my word in thy heart ; for i
say , parents , why this unavailing moan ?
of banners and pyx ,
last week as ever was--"don't pay
day , for the last and latest time make their sweet feasting
puddings of plumbs and mince - pies , placed
mounts into air , and moves her leafy plumes .
he is gone on the mountain
just then a scout came flying ,
a blue - black , tired sky--
are but as slavish officers of vengeance ,
dragging the corn by her golden hair ,
come back to me the days when , as a youth ,
here droops in banishment !
that he gave that bitter cry ,
his stripling choice : and he did make her his ,
so in each line survives
one arm about my shoulder , round my neck ,
he , by his herald 's voice , aloud proclaims
but this time , adequate , erect ,
that the craving heart in the tumult of gladness discovers ;
" in dust and death must scattered lie .
and a poultice on his breast ,
and roamed the silent brushwood . steeds he hears ,
think you with contrite smiles
and farthest from the heaven which circles all .
pervaded him -- although a generous creature ,
where the dead bones of wasted rivers lie ,
our convent 's rarest flower , a christmas rose .
what busy feet had trod
this cardinal his time hath waited ,
it seems the spirit of a flower ,
gude forgie us , and i hope sae will he !
thou regardest me ,
holden :   the gilded parapets were crowned
( if we keep no score , at least ) .
to remove this plague of northland .
we will dispatch idæus to the fleet ,
this only matters :   from some flowery bed ,
life 's like the dew ,
for more would ruin sight . but if that centre ,
for i fain would borrow
perfume therefore my chant , o love , immortal love ,
quick the crook - necked salmon darted ,
till they shake their prison
  " the hindu god , to whom the following poem is addressed , appears
where upon the gusty summits
an early , rich , and inexhausted vein .
nor fire , for just my marble feet
" much danger is lurking in thy petition ,
should these mountains lose their cherry ,
that land which gleams in the rapt poet 's ken ,
her workmen , bringing forth ,
what blind fury thus headlong carries them ,
and say " so far the porphyry , then , the flint--
her . most certain proof of innocence
he 's nigh lost his wits .
but for the virtue , whose o'erruling sway
his offers i repell'd -- but what of that ?
and meanwhile , elate
what is it ?   speak , i pray you ,
and the sweetness , and perfume
while my brother bideth by a little land in gloucestershire ,
an equal mixture of good - humor
enables one to be extremely terse ,
o ' cause they have their lighted streets -- their great
and those happy climes that ly
an ' soothe me , weeping at the scorn ,
the hand that held the glaive ,
in tones that swelled in volume till the sound
in honor of the lady ,
and signy 's bower on a low .
and we ’d be as happy as birds in the spring ;
wine that welcomes hardy morrows ;
or a series of stalls ( of the kind that have walls
by ducats ; closing house and heart alike
come to fright a parting soul ,
shadows alone are left !
his battles in the sunset . yet he knew
i know your calm forgetfulness is broken ,
is a house where girls surrender their bodies
if e’er with life i quit the trojan plain ,
a moral essay now is all her care ,
and the hay - shod ones are chanting ,
o brother ! where might i go ?
with a head of rotten timber ,
rejected my forewarning , and disdain'd
he is the equalizer of his age and land ,
to glass than water .   not so thick a veil
let us gaze on pallas ' citadel ,
jest with the horrors they survey ;
" or was it true , and is she but a shade
thenceforth , and that they both should live
are you not wise?--you know you are : yet hear
still to roam , and race , and ramble .
the lords who watched sugríva ’s will
proficere , et possit pingue latus fluere .
all others ; which if ye incline to doubt ,
he questioned thus : and she began
i 'll cross him an ' wrack him , until i heartbreak him
i 've beaten my breast with blows that stripe it ,
he bids ( 5 ) deiotarus : " o faithful friend ,
i see you buffeting the breeze ,
each year , when , as a barefoot boy ,
some world material moved around ,
thereupon the aged mother
now their broad black beaks they lifted ,
pass then the manner , since the learned say
of the heroes of the war of independence against the
for all things born one gate
thy simple speech i 'm not inclined ;
as westward flies the orb of day :
the babe at bethlehem ! how unlike the man ,
minstrel in the whole world , on whose lips all hearers hang
the roar , the crackle and the fiery glow
the nortons ancyent had the crosse ,
" una voce augusta . "--_monitore toscano _ .
of angels , can relate , or to what things
“ nor aught remains of picus save the name .
they could not have brought them better news .
kneels on the ground , his thanks to god presents .
and high prices ,
_ good luck befall you , mariners all
till her last flame be quench’d with her last gore ,
up from his brutal feet : this shrine where grace
as from the word is understood .
i beheld our nation scattered ,
unequal to pursue the crowned flame ,
though thou want'st not , thou shalt have them ,
o the horseman 's and horsewoman 's joys !
now the land bill has passed and the good time has come
and who am i to thwart his prescience ?
to his farm went thorberg skafting ,
what shall i make of it , i , who am trembling
" for the smiling lips of men
honour’d , belov’d , and mourn’d , here seward lies :
the orchards spangles hung .
that really my muse is perplex'd to declare ,
exempt from love of self , unchangeable
but these so much excelling parts the swain ,
of distant wave - caps breaking
on the fields of their fame , while proud laurels she gathers ,
of the old chronicler ben meir ,
of foes , his ursine legions led .
on a vain tongue punishment is inflicted ?
yet he can not chuse but hear :
lonely , tending sheep or cattle , and shipped thee thence ,
and little stars shot from their fixed places ,
so sham o ’ blue bills , wi ’ thi pints and thi gills ,
that easily ascended , to the right
at length he answers .   " it beseemeth well
ill fenced for heaven to keep out such a foe
with book and ring , a lifelong tie ;
there , in all the glory of the lordly linen armourers ,
the lightning 's past , the post must go ,
brighter glowed the fire a moment ,
tree - toad is a leaf - gray shadow
" this idol would i have removed away
then answer thus antinoüs harsh return'd .
brought back in this uncanny way , the hand
  [ with this description mr . tozer compares virgil , _ æneid _ , i.
warrants , and at them disdainfully it twists its
the ancient paused , and , unperceived till then ,
yon little stream hard by ;
the regent burns , and weens , by fraud accurst ,
i too am the sky !
then , when a weary month was spent ,
then eager the precious guerdon to win ,
and i thought of them all , tear - fraught ;
and she increased his bulk and bloom . dark his colour grew
with the strong witchcraft of ' anon . '
at last , in happy hour , my friend beheld
spares but the cloudy border of his base
through the forest , round the village .
consider how fair ,
samp'sa .    a synonym of pellerwoinen .
clouds with dim darkness mingled , from the ground
the vengeance due to this unlucky steel ? }
of doing vengeance for its own ire -- now marvel here at that
and their dead were your fatal sign .
which , missing it then , he forever must miss .
mashi and other stories .   cr . 8vo .   5s . net .
love shoots sudden glance for glance ,
  _ ravenna _ : ravenna and the neighbouring town of cervia were in
therefore art thou ever clearer ,
but they forget . he comes one day
to bless the vales , god 's first - born fold his purpose fills .
to ages unnumber'd thus yielding delight ,
comes day by day to dabble in
the hope of every clan and class
omnia tuere ,
moons wane , and races wither to the tomb ,
the world - stream raves and rushes ( hast not heard ? )
to stars that brushed them with their silver wings .
whether that life or wills or wrecks creation?--
he dodged the timber whene'er he could ,
in peaceful days when the countryside
four for the quarters , and twelve for the hour ;
whose roof with obscene carven gods is piled ,
the place is all so cheery and so warm i love to spend
now when wise penelope heard of the stranger being smitten
waitin ' fo ' her man ter come ;
until rayed aureoles bright , flare ,
i vow by the saints and the blessed marie ,
chains of sound
at first he pledged a miracle quite boldly ,
not sayin ' any word .
no careless watch the monarch neptune kept :
thus they halted and reflected ;
there 's a bleak devil in the young , my lord ;
virgil alone was thought too great a task--
he kisses and clasps him ,      and inclines on his knee
such as the fairy - queen before her knight
when you have been a naughty child ,
of yew and box and fishpond speaks her mind ,
nam si qui , quae eventura sunt , provideant , aequiparent jovi .
and many an eel -- though no adept
travel slack ,
must learn thy works to do ,
in dreadful silence , and the low groan came ,
into all the folded leaves
whose affirmation , or denial , is
you with worlds to watch and ward ,
grandmother 's story of bunker hill .
with grinning masks of life prevent
nor proffering barter ? " as he spoke they near'd
princes with princes , states with states contest ;
_ ( all round the sands ! ) _
' twould make a monkey cough to see our way o ' doin' things --
steering at random , just as chance directs--
and southward moves to meet the iberian bound ;
were murmuring into life again .
of disciplines , and pains , unpaid ) , must die ?
to pollute it ,
that soon the sweet young creature may
but child ! you must not cry ;
he gave the bridle - reins a shake ,
" into these full , clear , clusters , to repay
their bashfull cheeks together : newly they
and conio worse . ]   both in romagna .
but think me not from life withdrawn .
and oft she roams the maze of wildering groves ,
thus to a far serener day
o helen fair , beyond compare !
among the branches , whispering the fall of rain ,
with daily fires ; the last , neglect of wine ;
in common , ranged in figure , wedge their way ,
  ms . : " gracefully . " the reading pope substituted is not much
that their encounters seem too rough for jest ;
in this infernal vaile first met thou call'st
and harken . save these dardans sore - distrest ,
their bursting grapes assiduous pressing ,
that largest was which of the paladin ,
" how should i be white and red ,
and the star - spangled banner in triumph doth wave
" return ye then , and enter in before us , "
as their just heritage , he gave in charge
with target - circles that quivered and crossed
is grass with scythe , when dried by summer sun .
and sure half the country - side is as hot for her as me .
  as miss paues , herself a _ geat _ , points out to me .
an ’ badly shooed his feet .
an ' bounces me upon his knee
waters on a starry night
he , bearing her upon his breast , the woody ridges lone
hagan through sheer vexation , his wits had nearly lost .
attind with our allagiance .
strews all its honours on the earth beneath ;
ai gwell _ ffranc _ no ffrawddus _ gymro _ .
these fragrant limes between .
there are three white lilies ;
thriving disease ; a fresh , infectious air ;
tracks her through frozen and through torrid clime ,
strikes through the sun upon the window - sill--
clouds down below and heavenly bodies plunged
will split the quarry , and shoot out the head .
waiting in reason ,
and tears fast streaming down his alter'd face .
keep nefas et vim at a distance .
this world may full of devils be ,
while a few pray'd ( the first time for some years)--
sublime -- invention ever young ,
that he did n't do it !
“ the scatter'd seed devour : the darnel springs ,
what pilot shall explore that realm ,
my hate upon him .
then did the little girl reply
you see , of course , if you 're not a dunce ,
and the sweet shed blood of your veins ,
did the hand of the builder guess ,
“ disfigur'd now , my forehead 's side laments
aboon distress , below envy ,
transform the earth , not patch up the old plan .
thereto would i advise you , / ye knights of high degree ,
evil was thy mind and spirit ,
als thou made midelerd and the mone ,
after thine own . build partitions in the midst of the
the carousal held in secret .
quiet , to ask for closed
smilin ' sort o ' cuss was tim ;
dull brain , and dim eyes , and deaf ears ,
carelessly slept .   but many there stood still
thro ' the prison bars now darting ,
give thy hand - to - me ' , an ' o'er their watery boundary bring me
broke from the camp , so long besieg'd in vain .
ansel hosts to heaven ascending
him therefore nature checks ; he only knows , etc .
landscape that dwells in me , hold thou
in noon - day fervour of the sun , to dry .
and then slipt to the window , where she stayed
their arms were bearded darts and faulchions broad ,
strength to my courage , fortune to my blows ,
that hour regain
to endure for a little ,
in the murmur of the waters ,
sad philomel , in bowery shades unseen ,
as , in some well - wrought picture , light and shade ,
they who have drunk of the river of knowledge
and wander with a wandering star ,
and my experience greater far than thine :
we read it together in the garden here ,
worse than having ten teeth out .
that desert place
your bulwark , and condemns to greatest share
"             "          of its ethical and religious
by her it easily may be perceiv'd ,
how slow , alas ! he came !
and holy marabouts , betook his way
and if passing thou giv'st him a smile or a tear ,
if he found me with a crowd ,
primary syllabic stress . thus , _ en nuestra vida _ has
good husbandmen for sowing here below !
had plenty work to do .
by the slaves of a king , and a court all designing ,
onward i mov'd : he also onward mov'd ,
_ glyssa _ , to sparkle , glitter .
there to eat their humble store .
i heard the wail of women and of men,--
scapegoat of a people 's sins , and hunted ,
of beauty drowned and still in waters cool .
  pope fell into the prevalent vice of uttering extravagant ,
my daring rashness and presumptions be
and look , spike - helmeted , grey , grim ,
his words divinely flow ;
never has she wept in anguish
mark'd with a stone , thy last abode !
beyond the matron - temple of latona ,
conclude successful , as it first begun ;
' twixt po and mount , and sea - shore and the reno ,
we sunder'd one misty morning
but they all have shrunk away into the silence
they pass on .
and soul with soul again in that space
glide along with all ease in the sweet dreamy breeze ,
and ye believe not , how shall ye believe ,
but this old peaceful prince , as heav'n decreed ,
for sentinel stood .
with the risin ' sun to greet him from a night of peaceful rest ,
numbering , she scorn'd the goddess who had borne
thou wilt think of me , love !
and ne'er a speck of shine .
shorn from his wrist was his right hand good ;
i lead some bright nymph through the dance ,
then when i look on yama , i
or diggon her is , or i missay .
will perceive , will learn to know it :
the statue of mars began his hauberk ring ;
freely the sage , though wrapt in musings high ,
i made the cross myself whose weight
and encourages romance .
of eating , on the painted walls they stare ;
to give him the cead mile failte .
or let the ancient tree uprooted lie ,
that his whole heart upbraided itself at that sight .
oh , not to those whom thou hast led ,
or settles on the very crops of grain
that were so thin and sere .
vástagos de imperial rama ,
be lapp'd in alien clay and laid below ;
in search of summer , wander'd on the sea ,
to see a democrat well - nigh a king .
wander hence , forever wander ,
hitting her hoop smartly with her stick .
and god seems further from the heart .
till at last i came to anchor on the shores of puget sound ,
shall be together , breathe and ride ,
what thing ?
until in thy splendour
inspectin ' brums at steeny isaacs ' stall .
here in this happy dell . "
who needed none to urge . his savage simian blood
then like a bird the shores about , about the fishy caves ,
only the face of you unforgotten :
prevent you from the grand inheritance .
that of other animals arises from the greater facility , with
waxes and wanes .
" she is a relative of mine ! "
his miseri ne ver at restis .
to flowery trees , thy dear resort .
when thus rinaldo : " what i warrant true
the mallet to the pin !
every other vulgar light .
and when such counsel they receive
with the beauty of her presence -- for indeed
these grecian walls rear'd on italia 's shore ,
¡ oh fuente de hermosura !
give me a cheque -- five hundred pound . "
the luscious nectar . and long ago was extinguished
we journey'd on , in silence looking round
which lifts its diamond head ,
give thanks for every breath it breathes ,
“ fled from thy death ! ” the victor cried ,
draw we here a parallel .
so shines , that , were no temp'ring interpos'd ,
is heaven for evermore .
which it permeates completely
music , i yield to thee ;
it sets you ill ,
and cease while ye hear me complain !
while he wroth , ' tis well thou shouldst descend . "
her eyes vas himmel - plue ,
the parents , both , were well advanced in age ,
and with his bow , and crowned , he went forth ,
till all this earthly part of me
out of her heart ; whereon the charactery
what is the thought that holds her thrall ,
often is the mountain pine - tree
to conjure by , and still the same
to spirit back the muses , long astray ,
john of the temple , whose fame so bragged ,
weak i am grown , and must in short time fall ;
each opening bud perfumes the air .
how still the bells in steeples stand ,
what is thy wish ? make known to me thy choice ;
away , old man ; give me thy hand ; away !
huddle , the mossed stone drips abundantly ,
and , taken for the man whose crest he wears ,
in gratitude , sweet gratitude to him .
he lived and chattered many a day :
a mist cloud hanging at the river 's brim ,
" oh , write it , dear alders ! " the innocents cried ,
so likewise far from thence the sons of troy
he shames the higgling market - place ,
nine tenths of all we see
as he homeward turns , with the long day done ,
podrá exaltarse de la hermosa fama
you can pity the men who have woven
weeping , when their eyes beheld me . yea , and to their
down the dark stream which seaward creeps .
come let me nestle and press the wee pettie ,
thus had achilles his owne gests design'd ,
the holl of our civilized , free institutions ;
_ edition limited to thirty copies _ .
like some great star fix'd in its place .
he had a noble brother , bold and wise ,
know i well the ship of battle .
humanly suffering ,
swift through the palace pours the sprightly flame
i knaw it by mi birth ,
what can she more than tell us we are fools ?
here broke fridthjof in :
" _ i come _ , _ and with me comes the victorious day _ ! "
like a rose set in snaw was the bloom on thy cheek ,
see where she comes , amid a gaping crowd !
with rubies , and their blades of spanish steel .
his barren leaves . them thus imploid beheld
and said , " i will retire on this cargo of doubloons ,
we saw your star - dropt flag uncoil .
the dark and crispèd hair .
to strew the desert 's waste below ,
she welcomes all , and telleth every one ,
y tú diste tus amores
so golden schön ,
all discussions of importance ,
now it 's , " save the country , farmer !
for then are men most dangerous , when they stake
( ll . 551 - 579 ) " this , o prince of men , is no little wonder , which
heals their wounds and stills their anguish ,
and cardinal ippolito , your friend .
where rabbits peeped in fear and ran
ay , therefore ' tis they banish bulls afar
ολυμπιαδα δ ’ εστα-
ask not the cause why sullen spring
lord ronald kiss'd fair ellenore ,
as one might mourn the parted happiness
her friends were then a firm believing band ;
until that she saw her seven brethren fa ' ,
" you must rise with the sun , and ride with the same ,
ne'er ask'd a kinder maiden , or more civil ,
with fire from his own courts to burn it up .
now to sail the seas of death i leave thee--
the stifled sob rings strangely on mine ears ,
go in peace and lay your death to fortune 's door .
fare for ever well , nor fear ,
at sea let the british their neighbours defy--
in a ' his joys i mingle ;
allí , á mi vida junto ,
consonantal rime , and ( iii ) no rime .
as soon as aurora came sun - rob'd and flaunting ,
though ' e never was a patch on me in ' andlin ' of a pack .
why , while the earth , thou but enjoy'st an hour ,
if _ thus _ to hear thee branded be a bliss
with golden gleams of ripening corn ,
but all in vain : no eye has seen
as by a stream
there is a rapture on the lonely shore ,
so have ye from the monarch / faithfully his high command . "
as in the crystal stream i view my face ,
speech shall be for men , for all , but for me in chief ; for
till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast
and some swell mountains calm and high
without another word , and led him thro '
as if the feline race were all ,
let me , ' neath the blue
uttered he the words that follow :
along the cliff 's sheer height ;
i 've looked on my superiors far too long ,
wherof that ech of hem schal serve .
for silken tresses of this maid--
if those vast armoured throats dared to reply :
that banner , that banner bring hither ,
_ men are but shadows , but a vain breath ! _
which shone with ruddy gold she laid :
or desdemona with her willow song ,
with patience his modest opinions to hear .
was hang'd : and they upon their way
neigh of horses , bark of dogs ,
this favourite good begets peculiar pain .
as the rain that 's left in a flower ,
but fortune heard pan railing thus .
each limb productive of some hero springs ,
while drums , with rolling note , foretell
her answer'd then , ulysses , ever - wise .
listen now to me !   ye are three brothers :
nay more , i pity him his lonely heaven ;
man - te - o , the friendly weroance ,
an ye had been , & c.
our human form so wrenched that tears , rained down
the gods give to all whom they wished to destroy ,
hath now his temples upon every shore ,
in the tragic poet 's dwelling ,
incolumi gravitate ludens ,
there was a bosquet at saint cloud
_ swa . _   the fatherly god , in that far - off clime ,
her heart is a - cold .
dudon had issued forth upon dry land ,
with mingled joy and quicker step ,
loud my heart in anguish cried ,
converse with god 's servants , ' twas not in purple or with
and all the ghastly feeling of that night ,
of all our strife , god wot , the fruit is thine .
like that which , in the ocean shell ,
received such delight from books , that he was always calling for
who in the transient flattery swell and shine
gifts out of measure , bronze and gold in plenty and woven
and quiet darkness bringeth sleep .
the offsprings of great kings .
naught farther would be wanted : "
quedará desta vegada .
and no more bitter pain the mountain has .
for meditations upon unknown thought
was blest with many sons,--a race
one thought of sympathy .
this little corner keeps , exiled far
thy gaze draw near and near triumphantly--
that 's no way for a man to do at his age :
were grown but dull and empty of delight .
" mine armies dear till now have suffered woe ,
but i have donned the broken shoes
but now i will unfold
and from th'expanse of that green park ,
all subtly shall combine
though all partake their shining , yet in those
an isle , array'd in all the pride of flowers ,
each family of rapturous hurried notes ,
news , news of the trinity ,
what want these outlaws conquerors should have[ij][9.b . ]
" soon as the twilight tinge is fled ,
another movement with invasive tread ,
that would earth of its heavenliness rob .
aghast at what he does , and kills himself .
willie 's awa .
the world and al that is withinne .
in spring time o ' the year ;
gay bloomy creepers clothed the walls ;
then they hastened onward , onward ,
shall build up thy triumphant brows .
and deal a wound that lingers ;
keep back , all of you , follow him not there !
" the love that hath redeemed all worlds
and round and round them still in wheeling flight
each star of the ' other pole night now beheld ,
heart - sore and spirit - weary ,
yon wild mossy mountains sae lofty and wide
" oh , fie ! " laughed the almond , " that does for a story .
when sweet expanding love its object sought ?
if its beams will only show me
i go to god as a soldier brave .
the metal seeks itself to pour .
my jesus , as thou wilt :
i stood and watched her light uselessly burning in the void .
do thou quit thy chilly dwelling ,
let me not to the marriage of true minds
while de guard walk up _ dat _ way ,
and on thy pyre twelve noble sons of troy
was a breathless calm , and with a quick glance ahead , ( he
from that palace built of roses
“ to sad alcyöné . this juno bids . ”--
" take me with thee , horseman mine !
hurled from the summit of their hopes , and dashed
so suited to a slave - cursed land ,
thus calmly spake the eldest of the train ,
and the hoary cliffs with moss o'ergrown ,
azure eyes towards heaven 's light .
with trembling fear , as fowl hear falcon 's bells .
worshipped among us , owe me much . in short ,
who with her white locks , old and frail ,
as the flutterin ' wings of the birds that flew out
now for music 's lord has blown
and balmy drops in summer dark
not one lifted to stir the air .
" once the violets of this place spoke thus :
guittone , a native of arezzo , was the son of viva di michele .
there is a secret in it , a blessed mystery .
' tis , now , a necessary thing to say
lays him in her robes of linen ;
" over there , the mermaid - dwellings ,
that his place of rest were fair .
unshamed the narrow aim i hold ;
and rend to shreds my scanty joy 's attire ,
bright pinnacles of gold ,
marchaunt adventurers , the spring is well begun !
in the cushioned cabins , aft ,
ne'er have thy hands for jaded triflers twined
feelings ; he hardly looked at her as he said :
when the night is thick and the tracks are blind
i dost not know exactly what i 'd do ,
was taught to modulate the artful strain ,
extinguish the dull radiance of the sun ,
nor lie enamoured of thy woe .
not less was his acknowledg'd worth
and made no sign .
should the glee glaze
tumultuous , curving each his rapid step ,
to love lord gregory .
which nature would haue common vnto all .
departs , and overtakes , upon the way ,
of the lake of gitche gumee .
for hunting , roasting heretics , and boiling ,
lapsu continuo ruiturae in corpora nostra
et mutata suos requierunt flumina cursus ,
pierce the cloudless skies ,
one swift , farewell look , and said ,
doth glory in her whiteness ;
bringing the soul of great sebastian near :
in the angel - tongue ;
to break from us . ah , many a dream even now
the garden bee has wound his earliest horn ,
thine eyes are rolling a tempestuous light
a naked child , with sunkissed hair .
he reads the book of time from end to end ,
the woods are steeped .
the greatest of thy follies is forgiven ,
and guard the tender spray ;
" the noble guests he bringeth , / --this heard i him request ,
with dew of heaven as bimba - buds with rain ,
a painted mistress , or a purling stream .
of war , that , in its torrent , took
then with a quick dissolving looke
and children , with the prattle and the kiss ,
there , wait on everything we do
ca ' the yowes , & c.
his literary inspirations , xii , xvi - xix , xxiii , 17 ;
thy faint heart fails , bring me thy failure ! find
seen the people with white faces ,
( 1 ) hearken ! there 's nought so light ,
o best of bráhmans , first in place ,
but lust 's effect is tempest after sun ;
winds murmur and waters fret .
i walked alone and thinking ,
landlords fooled us ;
the love - light in her eye :
qui par le droit du sang avoient regne sur eux ,
to us is grave and grievous punishment ,
and from the grass learn wisdom ; wear thy crown
mothers from sons : if hither to resort ,
" a chambre had he in that hostelrie
and , as i climbed with heavy feet the cliff ,
if they approve of me .
and why ? because immortal as their lord ;
four kinds of lilac here are grown ,
and after added : " mary took more thought
in odors so divine ,
men grow ashamed of being so very fond ;
one by one thy griefs shall meet thee ;
" i thank him for all he has done for thee ;
the which in alle haste he bende ,
gazed hot , and of the fresh wave largely drew ,
we spoil the good we have in view ,
the smallest light that twinkles in the heavens
or _ murder _ , _ incest _ , or some heinous crime ,
and then , of a sudden , whelms and bears it away forthright :
as lightnings from the mountain cloud ,
and ask of the god who shines there ,
and in her hair wept softly and her breast
the beauty that 's gone !
i would kiss them often under the sea ,
here 's wood for fuel ; here the fire displays
canto xxxi . the perfect hermitage .
and some said with leers and with nudges and shrugs
the grosser feeds the purer , earth the sea ,
and they laid him down -- so tender --
now by the might my merits lend ,
i thy mirror'd image see ;
thou must perspire , in order that the juice
down the world with marna !
she jist sailed by an ' lef ' me standin ' there
quarum , quae forma pulcherrima ; deiopeiam _
thus does the red man stalk to death his foe ,
the joys of wine , immortal as my theme ,
you lie , for your man would take from my man .
never doth a sweeter song
in a more salubrious clime ,
the thin ropes are swinging with streamers of moss
and trodden hard upon , is like
of the labour that moves the world ;
a host in the sunshine , an army in june ,
the hours of peace amidst the bitter strife !
an angel in a dream brought cheer :
rolling down the ratcliffe road drunk and raising cain :
him .   when i came to the antechamber to wait , before prayers , dr .
bitter is servitude at best .   already
willing , howe'er , amidst the black to go ,
the like misfortune had not chanced before ,
listen with pleasure , for myself , the while ,
like thine , scarred veteran of a lifelong war !
these presents the emperor gladly accepted ,
marco tulio en la verdad
what is earth , statesman?--a place to win fame .
is long ; and distant far his head is plac'd .
on naught but what he found her stores among ;
did not his instant patronage command ;
a kitchen - garden 's my delight ;
con que á sicilia y nápoles humillas ,
his wildness , and the chances of the dark . '
that makes a kingdom of his mind ,
they pulled up panting and stood stock - still ;
dropping one tear upon the sword . disguised
who shall direct his way , nor let him want
that thei ne soffre noght at large
much irks it me , lest vow'd to toil and strife ,
and the green scene goes on the instant blind--
and pleas'd to hear his propagated name .
his wif , the which cam with him tho ,
_ poet voices passing . _
with your sharp spear of virgin will
to the hard rock , alcides ' arm set free ,
oh , she ca n't miss him half as much !
gather'd round a golden table , seated
is it the deer , that men may dine ?
to thee , the sun , upflames thy kindled fire .
to emblazon love 's delights
and here at least i may in peace repose . "
come ! go we to the garden with our wine ,
" i do not know , father ; he left me in the mountains . "
shall be repaid all loneliness and loss .
woe him that cunning trades in hearts contrives !
look at your lake !
on realms made happy .
they strove to gain this man or that - their prize .
das war so schön ! noch weht ein kinderfrieden
a while in every cot remained ,
till with disks like shields and stems like towers
that he shouts with his sister at play !
and the songs of elf were done .
to the people of pohyola ,
to fall through them into depths below depths .
one instant , fixed , as they had died upright .
the pathless waves beneath , and over me the skies .
canto lxiii . menaká .
--let us take the air , in a tobacco trance ,
"   10 , i accept ' that ' in 1646 and sancroft ms . as it is
says she , " glad i am you 've come
would all be lost , unheard , and vain as swords
the father and the master , with his spouse ,
the high - descended warriors could not but obey .
isti oculi ? aut frons haec quae magis astra velit ?
and , as the words were ending , from above ,
and hold the gates of freedom wide that take no keys of gold .
by some strange tie , the farthest opposites .
from his incitements and defeat his wiles .
like to a serpent , issued into light ,
or let the aged tree uprooted lie ,
and the rushing thunderbolt hurled him to death .
centre and soul of every sphere ,
" to call for , ' fore me , and thou look'st half ill indeed . "
my heart is wracked with fear
life has no pleasure left for me
captain , i only bore the flag ; i only---- "
when bells were rung and bonfires made ,
bore 's adversary at law comes running up . _ ] _ the adversary _ [ _ to
the black and the bronze , the iron and brass ; how they struggle
coz you 're needed up in heaven .   i am lendin '
so went i through the bitter and foul air ,
_ because that soul refined man 's common air ! _
the perjured scythian she lacked
we 'll sing at st . anne 's our parting hymn .
and then , perhaps , to elysium !
a white moth glimmered by , the woods were hushed ;
and laid it close vnto his naked side :
at the sound of the distant and dim cataract ,
my holiday shall be
bellatoris inops , hostique adimenda relinquens
and the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
no ships may sail that way ;
nor aught of kindness made the snarler fat .
like a thread of the silk it will leave us again .
yea , ' tis my pleasure , wolfhart , / thou sparest them all such
that spaniel found for me , )
thereafter four i saw of humble aspect ,
" thy soul is by vile fear assail'd , which oft
like love 's alarum pattering the sharp sleet
que tenéys ,
we d the ancient wainamoinen
then fear no mortal arm ; if heaven destroy ,
to side , and in the very heart of greece .
spring , the sweet spring , is the year 's pleasant king ;
" ye have made your choice , and the better part ,
though me lacke al the remenant ,
in the black snake 's deadly venom ,
in love of god without a peer ,
libera , etc .
there was tumbling of traitor fort ,
we must toil -- unhelped , alone--
with flowers plumed ) the swelling and subsiding
not wield ! "
he felt a depth of clear serenity ,
i , therefore , have no need to fawn .
' tis made of clay ,
in the thin air erect , ' bove half his height ;
that sallow cheek of hers to ' incarnadine .
and still be gerty ? who can say ?
to his last trump this drove the subtle spy ,
those scarlet judges , threatening bloody pain !
by whose bright course led on they found the place ,
that this good prince his wonted foe shall kill .
but if some sorrow do oppress my heart ,
but now unbounded by the shoar ,
on the mighty waste before her .
when all the heart - strings like wild horses pull
then wi ' a rhyme or sang he lash'd 'em ,
no rowdy barkers and no bands a - playing ,
and he winds adown the mountain high ,
for dora took much pains to demonstrate ,
" and domes and temples unextinguished burn !
keep them under thy protection ,
to crown their worth and valour bright
romara 's skiff is on the trent ,
behind the veil
dears , let us remember it , that song they sing :
delivered , for safety 's sake , with great riches , by his father
git up all sound , be put to bed a mess o ' hacks an ' smashes .
from the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream ;
how like a winter hath my absence been
on this point : that kabîr was a weaver , a simple and unlettered
with clang despised the ground , under a cloud
and a voice said in mastery , while i strove,--
arise : err not : thy fellow servant i ,
with lytell sprynges and ryuers , ofte so growys
what is there like to the cry of the bird
and a rose in her cheek?--o , past compare ,
thou saw'st him live , in faith expire ,
i saw an old witch - hare this night ;
some hard mishap upon his friends should light ,
is good enough fer yō ' sweet bride .
for little juan o'er me threw , down stairs ,
translation : woe - is - me ! woe - is - me !
cheerily , my hearties ! yo heave ho !
sampsa , slender - grown and ancient ,
so i can look upon her face .
" if you doubt my honesty ,
they sought the forum ; countless swarm'd the throng
other little children
and all that now our tenderest love can do
with death .
nor would i make myself a goose ,
over earth and air and sea .
knowledge .
a lash of whirling sound that never tires ,
but no -- what here we call our life is such ,
meysenhartus and his brothers
singing gayly to the wood birds ,
brings the great world sea - wave ,
though here thou liv'st disgraced ,
to my little baby dear ;
the moonlight with divinest melancholy :
" with future hope , i oft would gaze ,
to worth as freedom , wisdom as to wit ,
out of the reach of roses . "
turning over tubs of water ,
yet i wail !
nath'les , perhaps ye things may handle soe ,
and marvel at thy bounteousness to me ,
of pinafored girls ,
their low humility is like a crown ,
by that high fencer , even death ,
after much mis'ry ; and let life itself
of offering , and the merit of the prayer
and some tobit - like marks of his patronage shed ,
i journey at our king 's behest ,
the sun has gone seeking to - morrow .
and weights , and blows , encounterings , and motions ,
now were it best abide , or best
the soul of music sings
so deep their love of earth ; nor wound the plants
in its pool the lilies shine
' we see each other as vain and futile tricksters,--
so soothing to the heart of love ,
our fate is theirs , will reach them all . _
you deepen my dislike . the youth
that you keep smilin ' at -- and after they
been scared to hear it .
perhaps -- and hardly find a tomb .
the bell in whose alloy of mighty mould
of shadowy hands from the trees and shadowy snares in the sod ;
tall and slender like the singing wind reeds
the cheery god , who loves to smile
in white from head to foot ,
but the sea - fowl is gone to her nest ,
in the powan 's entrails hidden ,
great wrong i doe , i can it not deny ,
i 'd think shame to stick to nursie as that shadow sticks to me !
" _ nor yet too wide .
i 'm not afraid to die .
till throughout the holy land
may vent the sorrow which impregns my heart
to which both heaven and earth have set their hand ,
but if he returned , if he should look at me deeply ,
of the virgin , untamala ,
a parent 's hopes to crown ,
v. 88 .   my casella . ]   a florentine , celebrated for his skill in
that i had ten such coadjutors , wise
the flames that make the children ? for this woman
bird , who didst sing
unto the mayor with love again .
most truly about the first , " the sexton mused ,
in the startled ear of night
" and at length thou hast accomplished thy object , o large - eyed ,
in the dissolving circle , all the nations '
when shall we reap the fruits of all this toil ?
hath god said so ?
and the blades of last year 's grass ,
tidings , and where each one fell by a pitiful death ; but
your eyes were tearless and wide ,
until the angel of the lord
an ' damn'd excisemen in a bussle ,
wilderness , where happily friends are never cheap !
and the way lies dark between .
that flower of france , on whom they trusted most :
red lips of one i know , alight and smile !
and the rich goods from near and far
when your soul drinks in the beauty of the wonders in his plan ,
earthly and heavenly universe ,
tho he sware be hevyn kyng ,
stealing steps into the dark ,
of things thou caust not know of.--after thou
lifting to rest the city sanctified ,
at the midnight in the silence of the sleep - time ,
i kept , like asian monarchs , from their sight :
for by another sword thou need'st must weep . "
stood proud to hymn , and tune his youthful lyre . "
and the fragments all grew lovely .
and mixed herself with heaven and died :
your veil will drop to your feet .
still by the exile ’s side she stood
prouder than milan 's statued , spired cathedral ,
i who spake once to such a bitter end--
conventional standards poets merit every consideration , being
with thronging thoughts , the harp of poesy
that time and the world shall never move . "
i by not doing , not by doing , lost
take that banner down , ' tis tattered ;
telling around
malignancy and falsehood.--_ib . _
' son of laertes , of the seed of zeus , odysseus of many
they died , ay ! they died ! and we things that are now ,
the man with sweet words , over - sweet ,
of twenty thousand warriors thither sent ,
how can one work
so saying , he arose ; whom adam thus
as vitiated in nature : more to know
as duly tended , honoured , and well seen ,
oft to the tabor 's festive sounds replied !
" what a pretty girl , " said the young man with her .
and into their summ'd sweetness fall distill'd
then , jesu , i had rather sucke thy side .
of mightier foes , for both were framed to die .
hot - cross buns !
apparel , and the habits belonging to a gentleman . these
aut cecidisse urbis magno vexamine mundi .
seize -- fate 's harsh distaff makes appeal ,
see the maid with yellow tresses !
" ' tis well , ' tis well , " said the bonny wee man ;
but so it was that never the stranger entered
to his friend rankine of adam hill , in ayrshire . ]
that as unjust our justice should appear
those who on either hand may prop and lead them ,
too long to last where joy is brief .
he too had traveled ; at the age of ten
now , as the stars fill heaven with their bright throng ,
but yet you judged me wrongly , for believe me ,
as if he thought to pass from black to white ,
downstairs she glided , while the evening - psalm
of hatred to that gentle race and dear ,
so might she keep the house while he was gone .
yet i am at rest in his wonderful pity ,
in vain the snows may pass away ,
arm und nacken , weiß und lieblich ,
heretics -- the furies and the medusa head -- the messenger of heaven
the brightest shines in all the rolls of fame !
the corps is no nice of recruits ;
have we not heard the marvels wrought
bone and old ;
" hey , hey -- what , what -- fine fellow , ' pon my word :
far voices of a joy that sought and missed her
some brandy,--thank you,--there!--it passes !
the wretch , yet hissing with her father 's flame ,
where abraham fed his flock of yore ,
a timorous hind the lion 's court invades ,
and all the cabinet regularly hear
god , what a glory , is this consciousness ,
had shone in minneapolis .
ankles like to peggy 's .
i 've measured it from side to side ;
and the stars are asleep on the quiet sea ;
a little longer , in the snare detain'd ,
now falling with soft slumbrous weight , inclines
of country life in glowing terms , and " build the lofty rhyme "
dem .              thou meanest wherefore things
that with such perfumes fill the breeze ,
der könig schreit es wütend , er bebt am ganzen leib ;
i thought as ' ow ole bill was dead ;
one by one ,
through my hodden cloak to pierce !
a god might gaze and tremble at the sight
the seven mountains view ?
as from an april sky
if such the plague and pains to write by rule ,
the pow'r to look on him . "   forthwith i saw
a young thing i , unlearned in lore of love,--
take charge of me , and of my end .
such as mine eyes avouch .
of offerings brought , myrrh , frankincense and gold .
at first , for scarcely was the wine at flow ;
and wields his trident,--while the monarch spins .
she had the hard , cold edwards ' blood
or the soulful soul from kalamazoo ,
then the ancient wainimoinen :
when stormy is the tide .
hah ! no time has battle for tears ;
the west eighty - acre field,--
frae hame this comin ' friday ;
her forest - clothed frame .
at the cabin of his father .
before they nailed the plank ,
she by such a lord forsaken -- to resentment will not yield .
met and remembered when his eyes beheld her
the lie , and drank noght of the wyn .
i do not choose to dream ; there cometh on me
but , when she must be turn'd to graze ,
o sweet everlasting voices be still ;
and even though you are dead ,
in the shallow water 's flow--
and young ascanius , weeping by his side ,
and talked of the great world beyond the wood,--
almost brushed him with their pinions .
of these foul sins were stain'd . "   he answering thus :
each warrior brawny arm stript bare ,
o , the wild grape climbing sturdily to reach the oriole 's nest !
the master 's call , and loud his voice rebounds :
bun ' roond her leg ; gie her a cheer :
on roland 's border ,
when first upwafted by caressing winds
thus sings the muse , to johnson 's memory just ,
says he , " i 'd turn no _ millionaire _
nay , my little master , nay ,
in what odd sets the ghosts combined ,
rising , sinking
will any one survivor cry ,
to be drudges till the last--
they are the tragic sick sharp with diseases ;
where'er she be ,
is all pulled out and gone !
into the brackish stream , and a huge wave
falsus huic pinnas et cornua sumeret aethrae
where the warm spring sunlight , streaming
thy shearing feast which never fail ;
and for his justice , every method else
is the victor 's garland sure .
with elenor murray 's who shall know from this ?
a shadow large enough to screen his nose ,
prescribe and find medicine without any fee . '--
the sportive maids of paradise .
as beats the sun from mountain crest ,
manat rara meas lacrima per genas ?
the rocks on which we strike and die .
given now such aid , that to retrace your forms
that seemed , until they look about , and lo , the keels they see
what seemed stupendous in that lonely place,--
threading some bitter marsh , obscure , alone ,
o dear ! what a beautiful doll
then do not hurry .
my doom hath come upon me , and would to god that i
as i came through the desert thus it was ,
where the sun may dry thy vessel ;
while yet the hazy sunshine sendeth
secur'd from conquest by captivity .
receive my gifts , if mercy fails , yet let my present move ,
( hearing it from myself ) that i design'd
translating 's simple , too , as i can tell ,
and groped here and there , but she found none .
dining where vagabonds came and went flittingly .
y con un saludo
is virtue -- with a dash of vice .
two breasts which perfect stand .
and lavish with reiterations ;
only served their guests in silence .
you 'll braver be , '
did sing most loud and clear ;
there 's nought left in the fair dodhead ,
and , when he waked at length , his eye
and struck his finger on the place ,
and suffer celia 's quirks to be
of an azure house of dreams ,
levantando un monumento .
but everything is managed badly
only from thy lone heights like bullets fall
auld age ne'er mind a feg ,
sweeter than the freshest bud ,
by human pride or cunning driv'n ,
and laughing loves disport on fluttering wing .
flooding like the dawn thro ' the arches of the woodland ,
would you make it a tea - garden and on sundays have a band
where lily , hollyhock and rose ,
born of two mothers ! nyseus ! they exclaim ;
then ere the god , her own dear lord , replied ,
beyond which lies the dark .   some few we know--
long before the sun had risen ,
despite their tar and tan ,
of the sad heart,--the heaven - ascending spire !
toll for the brave !
leap forth , immortals , birds of paradise ,
the sun ' twixt pole and pole , ' twixt indus ' bed
and thy sweet face adds charm to this fair place ;
jane was n't where we 'd planned , the jade .
not fair - hair'd niobe abstain'd from food
they served the ' wine of honour ' fine ,
then i shall not leave without winning the match ! "
and when she answered him with love ,
of these fair - waisted nymphs the great
a mighty man wuz he .
never to bloom again , great henry shone ,
i mind as if ' twere yesterday ,
her cheek was very thin and pale ;
who mourn'd her lord twice ten revolving years ,
gods partial , changeful , passionate , unjust ,
bold , science - loving pig ,
all feebly foaming went .
in might and fury , like the warrior god ,
have driven a tawny lion from the stalls ,
who fed with moonbeams dropping silent dew ,
of that small lake -- her mirror still--
or have given way to slow mutation ,
the pale sun seems a ship to me ,
how lightly then it flashed along:--
over his boiling cauldron broods .
high in the paling light
on velvet tundra or virgin peak , by glacier , drift or draw ;
so still you sleep upon your bed ,
ví una ave de blanca color .
rendered into english prose
evening milk , fresh and delicious ,
restores the lovely form to fancy 's view ?
and from the see ( whose bounty to the just
the heavenly clouds shall weep , and be
with tears as of real woe .   i thought my belt ,
flew in great fear at sight of this reprover of our doings ,
while over the edge , peepin ' and peerin '
dim as a bubble 's prism on the grail
patient of toil ; serene amidst alarms ;
calls over this turf where her limbs recline ,
they could not well plead that old - fashioned excuse
the gravel . " hark ! they are watching for thee , " she cried .
sae flaxen were her ringlets
she faints , she falls ; her breath , her colour flies .
fro bedde on to pyt
in the next bolgia , snorting with their muzzles ,
in the open grassy meadows ,
him trained to war or inexpert ,
and birds close their bills .
steeds with their housings of rich silver spun ,
throbbing with a fiery beat ,
gret route , and ek of officers :
sacred sky , where the footsteps of spirits are furl'd
and all her people 's brain is but her brain ;
my vengeance full he 'll suffer , / if but my lord allow . "
and found the latent valleys without guide .
you had us for a half - way station
he rules o’er all the land ;
to speak what in my heart will beat and burn ,
far in the night .
of those gay things which are not thine !
or less , the angel - heart ) before
why can not i
pointed with iron sharp , to it made fast
which was to every mannes sihte
a piece o ' carelessness like this
there are two loves , the poet sings ,
pardon who had subdued him , who had gained
and in the place thereof weak fear espied ,
and mrs . jones by his behavior vexed .
" he opened to me his home and heart--
and with rich metall loaded every rifte ,
“ now noe no more nel i neu{er } wary ,
bending her blessed eyes on thee ,
cum turno spectante rubet ; non claudia talis
but who had built and who had planned
was roused to still greater fury , and his eyes gleamed with a
within my maker must all abide ,
whence truth and virtue bear no palms away ,
the shopman nicely shaven .
i ask for nothing superfine ;
like a brother .
den : de hawk an ' de buzzard went to law ,
shipwrecks , battles , and amorous adventures .   an illness which
in their rude grasp great thrones shall rock and fall ,
till at last the flood confessed
no longer dare as crime to brand
his son , and though he knew him brave
but when he 's dead i 'll marry you , as sure as i 'm alive ! "
from whom their power and all creation came ? "
they cast upon the present and the near ,
played the sunlight 's ruddy gold .
angered squaws with harsh voices
for that is not his destiny ,
in two syllabis , not gyuynge aduertence
would take this first , but love is justified,--
fond thoughts of absent friends and loves
very spacious was the wigwam ,
tranquil as stars that unafraid
to the sweet lips , sweet music seem'd a thing
the manner of its building , it is told ,
by my love so ill - requited ,
thro ' poets ' books , and how the streaming torch
blatant he bids the world bow down ,
we hear thy voice , o son of man .
to supply the passing stranger ,
and , in each intervening pause ,
thence in all haste advancing , all in arms ,
except by sign thou can'st not ask at all .            cl .
the man of god 's own choosing .
hush'd was the hall ; earth shook ; the firmament
_ haunted _ ( hänt ´ [ ) e]d ) . frequented by ghosts .
and many guides , and which of them is lord ?
to gird their blest prophetic loins ,
their hock and sherry draw ,
the graves are shaken !
failed for pure love ; yet so time served their wit ,
i asked my dad , and he said to me ,
what care we what comes to - morrow _ ? "
deutschland mad in fool career ,
coming to me from far--
may have some pretensions to honour and fame--
trippingly and like an old cinder - wife this glutton speaks ,
he found not only the old blaze ,
there 's a garden
both now had wheeled , and fierce encounter made .
alzóla cortés don pedro
the crowne , for which upon their necks he laid
johnson 's rasselas .
i put my hat upon my head
or coiled by the northman 's written rock ,
and you find yourself hoping its wild father lightning
they say the ashes of my namesake
" i have worked harm indeed by coming forth .
their boats and their barges with slaughter were fill'd ;
that man i love ! but most of all i love
there lies my gage . none ever said
bring'st from the city ? have the warrior band
yet , colonel , if your grace awards
oh , thou who burn'st in heart for those who burn
freedom 's established reign ; cities , and men ,
flower - de - luce
shatter your leaves before the mellowing year .
let me twine with you caresses ,
and the aeternall morrow dawn ;
she 's welcome fifty times ,
and , if that ye have found it , ye that be here ,
hastened to his aged mother ,
forgive me if he recognize certain thoughts or expressions
' twill then be known , the offers we 've refused ,
nor for desire of foreign store
but set her distant , make him pale to see
of speckled eggs the birdie sings
with human blood ; whose idols there
the work we choose should be our own ,
this uttered , straining all his nerves he bowed ;
knowst thou what wove yon woodbird 's nest
a man of armes shaaesaes thou be ,
he that wyll coueyt to bere more than he may
from the cool cisterns of the midnight air
" this gift i give , that till thy limbs are laid
the whole plantation lightened of its leaves .
an ' bake them up in brunstane pies
" though my stomach was sharp , etc . "   this couplet is not
and swift of foot and baying loud goes following up the flight ;
to a dim alley lined with musty bins ,
one was an ' arf - caste widow ,
there 's nothing too good for the irish .
to embalm that tent of snows .
listen to the hours calling
" unless thou yoke thy liking to my will ,
and in words like these expressed him :
and , hurried on by blind and furious mood ,
heralds and pursuivants prepare ,
here doubt perplex'd your noble mind ,
their spirits looked upon my torture ;
" o my brother ! do not leave me ,
but , ere the latest breath was drawn ,
i ' ve wander'd scotland o'er and o'er ,
in the rapture of life and of living ,
first - born of the sons of seth ; and he was first of all the sons
of a " jolly bachelor " ;
those remaining of the tamals
reader may sometimes make . it is not commonly realised that
aptat qui iuga tigribus ,
with their two bodies that had loved on it ,
an ' a ' your kin sae dear ;
an ' fading in its place .
tunc te postea rex iubeo recordari mei
" like the boy doll , " suggested the old clock .
must our happiness fall ,
ortygia 's port we leave , and skim the mere ;
i ' th ' seas , she saves her passengers .
give thanks to heaven if she 's unknown to thee .
all kinds of clothing he eschewed,--
calling his son , philœtius , and eumæus ,
und sternlos war die nacht ,
to find peace in
the entering in of the gate , and wild rage gat hold of him ,
his name and mine are unstained as the flame
ere long they manned the rafts in eager wish
survive he only , renegade disgrace ,
joan must depart , and ne'er return again !
is : " long live scanderbeg ! "
but the palm is naught to the dauntless ,
where the smile of friend or neighbor
and in the milky valley that 's between
their golden hearts . or , love , with me to float
he treasures up his bright designs
a right christmas , as of old it was ,
one foot resting on the cross - bar ,
these mystic warnings , for they are of heaven .
on its hind legs itself it reared ,
i can not grasp the shadows as they pass .
she stood : he pass'd , shut up in mysteries ,
from the sky the sun benignant
to call them back , and rearrange the verse ;
the sword of england shall shine over thee ,
your hair ... your smile -- all around is sea and distress
matter to mee of glory , whom thir hate
the cat had thus saved me my category ,
to find the child of janak still
a something half wild to her strange character .
he sees with lust of gold their eyes on fire ,
to darn the great explorer 's eyes . )
for in good feith this wolde i rede ,
but or halfe be done his money clene is spent .
of whom , i learn , that he frequents no more
thus , fed and sheltered by thy matchless might ,
they are starv'd and i am fed .
at last he saw where daylight shed a
no signs o ’ rain to fall ,
what vengeance proud mezentius had prepar'd :
when ossian , in his address to the sun , exclaims,--
occasions , or conspicuous consequences , in an even unnoted tenor ,
played until the yenadizze ,
thought with what other hopes ,
pensive , and full of painful jealousies
wherever sown , luxuriantly it thrives ;
there a magic drink they gave him ,
everything will return--
what marks the frontier line ?
_ shakespearean tragedy _ i ignored in it , as far as possible , such
as soon as you 've applied the text--
would they have been to rest mid - way between ,
was moving toward the shore ; his ponderous shield
though for the quest a life is not too long .
red wind ! from out the west
too great a burden .
until our tongues shall tell our ears ,
with such a smiling cheer !
they['re ] both of them merry and authors like you ;
and happy with thine open smile ,
_ this _ is the path , whence there is no return ! "
twice over ' fore this cove ' ad ' arf begun .
' but , lady , if your maid may be so bold ,
thyself and in such case we need thy pity and benevolence .
or heavy is thy nuptial vow?"--
that one white blossom bringeth forth .
" this thy little childhood 's crown ,
what fate propitious , or what dire dismay ,
i should a little longer stay
and yet i know .
merrily merrily , to welcome in the year .
you 're a first - class salesman . you know your line ;
procession of a temple frieze . _
or old nile 's glory , were i anthony .
the unwilling muse too long:--come , while the clouds
chatting with her youthful knight
upon the peace ; and , past desiring ,
the glowing sun up yonder
seize the lightnings from above ?
to trace her flight might but insult her king ,
was , like most other bagmen , remarkably shy ,
( we , wretched mortals ! lost in doubts below ,
for ever.--the wild vale that lies beyond ,
and if i write , my secure chaire holds mee .
closed fast that pleasant home of peace and joy behind them .   no
as when a lion in the midnight hours ,
then paid their off'rings in a sacred grove
" if i go with you , if i go a - maying ,
gaudebis minus et minus dolebis .
around the lattice their tendrils spread ,
to see a bear , as guiltless as on monday--
repenting follies that full long have fled ,
breathing like one that hath a weary dream .
whose toilette was far from complete ;
with thee , the bowl we drain , indulge the feast ,
had numbered fourteen summers . i know not
pour freely from our liberal stores
that pleased the admiring stranger may proclaim
under the deepest shadows of the hall
enough to glimmer o'er the yawning wave ,
and sketched on horn the spear he hurled ,
i know that , till to - morrow i shall see the sun arise ,
jimmy was envious of the thing unknown .
mother left her quite a pile ;
mingled beneath the fever of the light .
and potent france atchieve the humbling stroke ,
of the times when we first settled here and travel was so bad ;
that he wanhope bringeth inne ,
leave to the multitude their riot !
because he was slaine most treacherouslie
do tenia el coraçon .
that is ever watered by my tears , since the day that
that ran with even course her liquid way .
my sole complacence ! well thou know'st how dear ,
the portals of the heavenly world ,
chaffinch and goldfinch and lark ,
resembling thus the artist in her work ,
this little moment mercifully gave ,
and she with her fingers
while down its steep most headlong driven--
that none of them were of the homeric age . knight infers from the
of brazen africa !   thy grave is one ,
above the city 's rout ,
which of his kinde softe and swete
and i often asked the question :
sez he wunt vote fer guvener
what wretched soul is this , on whom their hand
he helt in hand a roller
" but when i see the beast abused ,
the depths of heaven reflected there .
to the anxious mother waiting ,
for he was always weak .
who gives not but receives .
fly without wings .   nor only him who asks ,
and to th ' immortals all address'd his pray'r :
or litter to be trampled under foot ?
of champions well approved in perils manifold .
of human learning ransacked all the stores ,
with mlechchhas(229 ) and kirátas(230 ) teemed ,
he sweeps up the poor little pretty faces ,
i expect , though , everyone 's heard of it .
after the ranging sunset of farewell--
tarry thou not , my fair spouse mine ,
thy hands , and sage in counsel . but this is a hard saying
and many a blessing follow'd him , the day he went away .
from lonely prairies and god 's tenderness .
own country . but this , methinks , will never be ; yea , sooner
enters bore , who grasps his hand with great show of affection and
care is moonshine ,
but said the nurse , you now must let her stay ,
under the light
and swiftly left the hall .
while from beneath some cumb'rous boughs hard by ,
of love ; and for this sadness of the earth
the secret half a county keeps , the whisper in the lane ,
with rested lance , he darted from on high ;
we learned no other way ,
  _ a noble lady _ : the virgin mary , of whom it is said ( _ parad . _
heaven 's batteries in reserve , growled o'er the sea ,
whoso can deem , how fondly i had fed
then take the vantage whilst you may :
sweep through her marble halls !
músicas lejànas ;            \ _ trochees . _
when the marriage was completed ,
for such a noticing .
dans les fleurs .
the everlasting guard of god : there fat the soil was grown
rest of the poem . i suppose xii . 103 to have been also added by
in the connexion by the genitive pronoun . men in general
is named from dramas of great bard ,
bright over europe fell her golden hair !
contracting fibre , and to excite the sensorial power of
each striketh other , unhorsed they fight ;
the cup that is longest untasted
when his old heart was young .
and olive - branch is wither'd now ;
a brutal figure , and a bestial mien .
though tears half - blinded me ; yes , i remained going on and on ,
sons of astyoche ; she , lovely nymph ,
they thought not at all of the " style " of their clothes ,
vibhishaṇ , and the four he led
the royal bark had ten . our ships complete
' t was sabbath with the bells divorced ,
that he was come midst the king 's men to fight
the weeping mother on calvaria
o spare my life , and send me back to see
permit not these to sue , and sue in vain !
then an older man said briefly ,
' tis not for sin you so drearily die .
ask the indian congressmen -- only do n't ask me !
loving , trusting , and foully paid --
you go hiding in the mountains !
and we spoke in better cheer ,
and ne'er again torment mine eye ! "
what do they know ? what do they know ?
stirred the blue quiet of the italian sky ;
thought she : they 've made a little fire
exhausted quite , he took a seat .
as is the morning 's silver - melting dew
and chiefs call me brave ,
pitched precipice and nightmare gorge ,
their hearts so ,
who tore the fair brests of thy freinds ,
you do not hear them ;
does he dream he is in heaven , and is telling now his dream ,
thou who see'st the heart ;
been in this world , " he murmured to himself , " so delicious a
presently thus to her husband exclaim'd the good - natured hostess
to be on every side , to be everything , to be nothing long ;
for her lost shoe .
wanders trackless amidst its own ruins , may hear
forth he hastens on his journey ,
you never knew
if aught had broken a single link
and the proud eagles of his cohorts saw
and the splendor
born to contend , our lives we place at stake ,
or pluck the other off , leave him like an egg ,
the low bleak tower with nought save wastes behind
the lusts of blood and hate our souls abhor :
from going to sleep ,
for the poem from _ ardours and endurances _ by robert
where guilt hath no redemption , on it speeds ,
cherish for him , whate'er his name ,
and when he some few paces thence had gone ,
hence lives he , to his inner self endeared ;
i remain now carelessly
sweetly , sweetly blew the breeze--
ah ! i am old,--and i forget .
where shall the baby 's dimple be ?
lo , above us , the day - spring beginning to break !
un air d'hydrocéphale asperge .
here in the city 's ceaseless roar and din ,
to lie , and listen to the mountain flood
of the great god , took her away
then ; but a power he could not break withheld .
where old carew in his snow - grave slept .
is it that a year ago
as sea - robbers , over the brine , for they wander at hazard
both away in my bosom -- there , in a heart - niche ,
to the last home earth 's weary wanderers know .
an ihren hufen
bonnie bonaly lies smiling between ;
a tourist 's cap is on my brow ,
or hath fond love thy heart so over - gone ?
and danced and cried our _ evoe _ !
be reborn from the gulf we can not sound ;
made of deer - skin dressed and whitened ,
and from that sunset down the roseate ways ,
great pedro 's son in noble soul he proves ;
and how to pass him in yon narrow way
of thine unworthy fathers mark the graves ;
minos , and was slain in that war . ]
use not yet the thongs of leather ,
so i may , when i wake , if there be an awakening ,
nay i would from my mem'ry cast
eye each other , one wild heart between .
is half so incoherent as my mind ,
_ if i chant my little lays
such as you are , get your following together and sail beyond the
well , then we met upon the promenade .
must understand his meaning .
his constellations set ,
athwart the lintel of death 's house , and wait ;
his shadow crossed the lighted floor .
of ymer huge , whose flesh did make the world .
he that hath vexed thee , hath despised thy sire ,
beside the block he stood and set
for all adore and love the master art
fish hatcheries here had their birth ,
quick the hero , lemminkainen ,
upright , as far as can be in this fall ,
what 's this thou singest so falsely , forsooth ,
and plumes anodding to and fro ,
an ' i 'm that proud ! i braid her mane ,
ore sacro cecinit ; patriam quoi cura petentum
and offers open lists till the ninth day
loves the more for being jealous ,
but the drum
but young alphonso , like his sires of yore
and every guest , to shade his head ,
the part of the author , or any opportunity to correct and
praised by pompeius .   break ye with your breasts
o daisy mine , what will it be to look
as red as rubies are thy lips ,
how to a folded bud again
it would but increase his smart--
that will heal the wounds of eagles ;
was flying , from my temples curling rose
all wrought with diamond after dorick wize .
ere lips learn words or sighs ,
i 'm sure that when i 'm big and tall ,
thy presence means revolt , unrest ,
for the thing that 's flying .
and the lurid glares break through it
and -- on her birthday -- for a spree ,
in spirit : thou hadst deemed us of one blood
watching where shepherds pen thir flocks at eeve
for you and marian ! all i had to give
creep o'er the prairies broad and green ,
floats the white summer cloud .
thy yearning amply fed at last , prepared to meet ,
" he who , from zone to zone ,
little noses cool and pink ,
but we can be co - workers
celebrations were general among the children of the entire
i saw within my troubled head a heap of thoughts appear :
pastime of heav'n , the which those ardours sing ,
of lustral water from the brook .
the roof now is shingles , then it was tin .
which , ere long , more than planets shall embrace .
sneeze on a thursday , for something better ;
while in the fire - light strong and clear
silent art thou , o my lord ,
for after that the bokes telle ,
made prostitute and profligate the muse ,
wha for thair awin haif evir bene ;
for worldly welth doth vyce oft multyply
of yellow lupin , added host on host
cuanto abarca el mar bravío ,
each act be worthy of his worthiest aim ,
how , my dear mary,--are you critic - bitten
if safe we land on argos ’ fruitful shore ,
the dark , and leaning up a cypress tree ?
the tramp that seeks new roads to fare ,
or , to amuse the loitering hour of peace ,
when up and started our gude queen
far , far , here the dust is quite wet with our showering tears ,
once again in human figure ,
dryden 's version .
what fear had death for me , self - destined to be dead ?
irregularity for harmony
and she could not have hit a more excellent plan
that samsons perish , too !
kissed by strawberries on the hill ;
stingy , or giving our goods away--
" _ see this my garden ,
because , in sooth , he dreads too clear , too plain
as he did when the fishing was o'er ,
when the soul rests within the shade of death ,
non cui profundum cæcitas lumen dedit
starts , the new voice of spring to hear ,
as yourself .
of love in us thou hast so great desire ,
their column , though the turkish batteries thunder'd
and with my hapless brother pass below .
beyond the raging tempest
for the sheriff seeks a white girl . "
the golden cluster on our brave old flag
eye to pierce the deepest deeps and sweep the world !
while held him close with steadfast heart . but when now
while groans and howlings filled the place
but my spirit was gray ashes
it will be readily understood that mr . gliddon 's discourse turned
all the night the plague 's growing ,
in that enchanted desert , where the tone
we soon shall meet in yonder blue
unveiled as kinsman , love did seek
as a symbol of the brave
came a despot whose invasion
and you will be my wife , maud ?
somewhere yonder , in a world uncharted ,
a flood of thoughts came o'er me
for all our several and joint devising
he mirrors his stars where the ripples rise
the consummation coming past escape
then roam afar by mahí’s(669 ) bed
but his smile it was pensive and childlike ,
so ráma kept unshaken still
and fortified his soul with prayer .
yet village gossips dawdling o'er their ale
quickly rises in his snow - sledge ,
our numbers each sunday is swelling
and our friendship last long as our love doth and be stronger
here , on his recent grave i fix my view ,
they melt my heart outright ,
lepynge in a well , or in a flamynge fyre
there life lay waiting , so sweet , so sweet ,
he spoke , and loosing from his hold
them yet again :
a river ran , conducts his holy guide .
falls back into the arms of little john . _ ]
already from the streets and marts
while all their wives , their brows with frontlets bound ,
he talked for a good hour of what he would do , and his dream grew
" upon the wings
“ to my shepe wylle i stalk , and herkyn anone ,
my fluttering soul . too well the sounds of woe ,
and must i still be sad for thee ?
of oncoming silk ,
our king sugríva ’s orders send
darkness and horror stood ! but from the space
you may alter to
in deep surprise and fear ;
homer , this health to thee !
which secheth eases manyfold .
at this word all the french together shout .
breathes o’er me perfume .
when they tell of him lightly appeased in a scream
upon a bosom fragrant and as fair ;
and , undisturbed by this world 's breath ,
on its own brood;--no demon of the waste ,
clash the barber 's shears ;
" yet write i must .   a lady sues :
her first thought was to cut off juan 's head ;
mamma est un belle coolie .
things beyond the cognisance of sense . thus there is no
do you see them there -- as long , long since--
the waves his sails the wide world 's goods explore ;
and she breathed a low , half - conscious sigh ;
they swept their barriers weak and vain ,
  marvell died in 1678 ; linnaeus died just a hundred years later .
oh ! we ne'er shall see the like of captain paton no mo'e !
or in the darkness , glimmering berg on berg ,
swift , swift , you fly with burning cheek
" good sonne , where lindis winds her way
are a swarthy brown ;      i am swift in flight .
and find there is no flaw in any scene .
and active sports to manlier might
into some silly joke will be turnin ' it :
ever in act to shoot ; a dreadful belt
  of whom the hound is the symbol , and to whom dante looked for
scarce the frail aspen seemed to quake ,
the lawns and gardens fine .
must thou fall back upon old instinct now ,
just then the telephone began to ring ,
with never a bit of bread therein ,
let loose their carols when they please ,
and you 'll take the flowers in to her , and surely they 'll never
and pulls away most joyful to the old black barque !
flaggy<78.3 > thy wings , and scorch'd thy thighs ,
around me broods the dim , mysterious night ,
to do the right , all deaths i dare .
so once more i ’m looking for a job ,
ah ! thou hast young endymion ,
y el pecho lo aspire fácil .
to think ' twas rodomont the youthful peer
the cows down in the pasture ,
could never declare with a mind sincere
swarm the merry millions of the wild white
then i ' elps ' i m on ' is way ,
what is calling , billy khaki , that you 're foot-
" you sleep , achilles , and have forgotten me ; you loved me living ,
i 'll come to thee by moonlight , though hell should bar the way ! _
where the shadows pass .
waving , the moment and the vessel past .
like the linnet green , in may
the first ane was a belted knight ,
hath wrought his restoration :
around her head the stars are set ;
_ and , o ye vile , ye that might have been loved , _
full many a wonder might i / of their rich apparel tell .
encompassed us on every side . there they slew many of us
in one weak , washy , everlasting flood !
  wriblis = warblings .
copernicus , with a cry , upraised his head .
_ eld . bro . _ thyrsis ! whose artful strains have oft delayed
' twas rubi in whose mournful eye
ring out , ye crystal spheres ,
which is coming ! "   there was not a voice raised to tell ,
as fair as ever , and run in ,
till , as with clamour
for donald was the brawest man ,
of this same gentle evangelist ,
or else he is at his own house certain .
but now , behold , what
affirmative sipa instead of si .
which says , ' coming , though late , is still better than never . '
and five damned trawlers with their syreens blowing
whose span of earthly life is done ,
echo .                                          guard her well .
that were never published were his tragedy , called the soldier or
hyrcania breeds , or hyrcane forest hides .
" --silvery lonesome lapping of the long wave . "
" do n't mention such a simple act--
own,--excuse my good opinion of myself .
bow'rs built of amber -- bathed in silver foam .
where knots of trembling cowslips bow'd .
their ears with wax moulded between thy palms ;
and thou , even thou , of whom we know not yet
no more shall freedom smile ?
naked he lies upon that memoried bed ;
working the snow with his fingers . _ read ye the story of ung ! _
_ yell _ , barren , that gives no milk .
but be never war to white lilly
high on the brow of the alps ' snowy towers
and bright the lady is who shares his bed .
w.            to - night , sir !
and love itself would nearer bring ,
( like robinson ) whom lack of brain
nor meat nor aught beside the monsters heed .
came forth the shaft and blade ,
here ! sweep these foolish leaves away ,
and to the palace bent her steps again :
fortune hath evere be muable
to his friends so good ? "
all brass , in the front ,
as for some dear familiar strain
his trust about betraying , loud he cry'd;--
in sign whereof their naked brands they rear .
imprimis , never be an editor ,
my own heart let me have more pity on ; let
to thee , of all things upon earth ,
a single beam , its origin must own
he said , and furious with his spear again
but now kiss her and thus say ,
splendor waves ,
litis , to wake from sleep and find your eyes
robes of fur , and pots and kettles ,
for flinging her upon frontino 's croup ,
thou my secret faults concealest .
the sailor pauses as he quaffs his tot of navy rum ,
have dawn'd a fair and sinless child of sin ;
the slowly rising tide of the white flowers ,
their conquest is supreme , their laurels ever just .
arise , dear brother , let us go
and yet was as sweet as the day it was cast .
paid . each was trying to make his own case good , and the people
he would not yet give o'er ,
as a feather is wafted downward
did n't grow in the trunk of every tree ;
the best of all the other seven at need ;
cho.--hurrah , boys ! for the fire brigade--
but as it chances , if one sort of food
here let us burn them in noon 's flaming torches of fire .
sent for the wise men and questioned them ;
we ranged the chessmen on the chequered deal .
then turns away , his face as wet
alike , but still resisted , from the ships
de impetuosos ademanes ,
in fiery flame .
now god to manifest his glory .
shewing her wreathed rootes , and naked armes ,
showing them their deity ! "
white is whitehall . but not st . bride 's in fleet - street ,
breakfast -- takes me to see his fine scenery on the stream of
thy rural loves are nature 's sel ' ;
' hear me , ye wooers of the renowned queen , that i may say
' mong orange - trees , clipt into town - bred decorum ,
the pavements grim ;
where grief ca n't reach you more !
prayer is the christian 's vital breath ,
is blacken'd -- man 's forgiveness give -- and take !
" florent , how so thou be to wyte
" each to his taste!--but to my mind ,
the wandering tresses of her locks of gold
for ráma slaughtered in his sleep .
upon its very edge we came to a stand .
dei5damie he hath be nyhte .
glugs with petitions for this and for that ,
nieve á la tierra .
would stop his roaring bellows and his song.--
and comely orders , in that fight
stood , hurl'd in vain , though by a forceful arm .
still fearing , of the lion was her feare :
and leaves the mind all dusk and dim
so for a time my labor seemed in vain ,
with joy , and joy to endure and be withstood ,
a scarfe besides she made of cunning frame ,
through the wide bridges of that fairy town ,
even , sir , by them your heart 's esteem'd ,
like things which i had seen and heard below .
the evil of the world is lighted up and made clear--
si frais , si virginaux ,
love , to wander with me there .
steal away silently , fearfully , at thy flute 's music .
i see the people marching by ,
were wound about thee , and my hot lips prest
it might have graced a rosy bower
twilight , for one thing we pray ,
us of thy sunny sheaves of harvest day ;
for sanctity , they have , to these ,
offence at this , leave the house and feast elsewhere at one
“ for what thou’st sung within the grove ,
they made her face the jousting field
dardanus , et versis lugeret graecia fatis .
the southern scott , the minstrel who called forth
and in her carven chamber , oaken dark ,
swift as she ask'd , the ready sailors swore .
if man 's nae framed to lift his fit
of martyrdom , and fortitude , and right .
jumbled leagues of hillock - wandering .
" swift through the ocean clove the flashing prows
like the language of home , thy water whispers to me .
i grant your outlook far exceedeth mine
as master , landlord , husband , father ,
she hoped the judge would come again .
christ 's wrath he fears ; and , since in waters sweet
_ ' tis _ not that then no pain could sting me ;
to whom the vict'ry is decreed by heav'n . "
wiseman , the , iii .
are sweet in the renewing ,
for their richest entertainment ,
at one 's heart because of a june sky ,
swept swift upon its devastating course ,
will spirit - messages be backward blown ?
‘ by god that bought me dere ,
in curtained bonnets and light array
the nymph who most her hapless queen held dear ,
but lordly stalks ,
some think great wealth a blessing , but it can not stand the test ;
go with her , heart of mine , i pray ;
many of his friends blamed him for not making choice of another
the account in the _ ynglinga saga _ of the fight between onela and
while one huge whisper of primeval awe
and rend his fabric from hem to hem ?
he vaults no more with vigorous hops on high ,
o forest - shrined hour !
catch , then , o catch the transient hour ;
kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors . but by and by
some wood - born wonder 's sweet simplicity ;
gleamed on the bosom of the flood .
in bright mist mantled from the toe to lip ,
the stars hold their breath counting the hours , the feeble moon
swept the long surges , and a gurgling sound
now shamed at heart are we
then each the fight had ventured , as they stood ,
push'd out and pouting full and bold
_ les vaches bien gardées . _
i dream of the ancient wonders , but greater than them all
his calm love is a chain that binds me fast ....
sufristeis sin gemir lenta agonía ,
around these images , and cling :
bound neatly , and lettered " whole duty of man ! "
pulastya followed , next to him
or as hyperion , whose bright shoulders ever
he spake , and bidding horror and dismay
dewdrops are the gems of morning ,
a woman oft looks best , sir !
all deeds of the glorious signy , and her tarrying - tide of woe ;
plucked from the crown , and showed them to his knights ,
cui res audacter magnas paruasque iocumque
how the waters laugh and glisten
that half - mad thing of witty rhymes
and suddenly i feel within my breast
we chumped and chawed the buttered toast
fell , as they journeyed . and the furthest steep
yet is another thynge more lothsome and vyle
obtain further information , by turning to the passages referred
and nought of his despair .
i count for advantage .
and wear their strange old virtue , as they will .
dignitate et virtute .
made their lives darker than a starless night .
there pagan - priests , whose creed is wrong ,
a flood of light , as when the sun doth soar
but not to all the sire vouchsafed return .
my venerable fathers stood
thine eyes grown awful , life that looked on death ,
like swaying serpents round those wands entwined
poor child , unfortunate from birth , at least
" ez thet some one 's an ass ,
since when , a boy , he plied his trade ,
but thou must needs drink of this water before so great a thirst ,
unsupported . do not aim at him all at once , but six of you throw
what her mother had told her to shun ;
and began to shout full loudly ,
saw scorpions rise to sting .
' can we havanna 's bloody siege forget ,
thy long , long bills , whence nothing is deducted .
by pomp or power , thou seest a man
unable to repress the tear ,
( such led to thee o soul ,
she swings the battle - axe , and blow on blow
or shallow , but his course ran deep ,
in sight of the city of troy .
advised the mastiff to think twice ,
i sprayed and gargled , wore a mask ,
--there they are!--he exclaimed,--look in .
with his large quiver , and the lion 's hide ,
but it revolting , looks for tempest ,
ver . 49 .     _ expunge the whole , or lop th ' excrescent parts
could save but two , and one must yield to fate .
that haunts her slumbering babe , so far she drove
in an attic to the basement ,
but generations go and come ,
who saidt : " gott knows i meant somedings vhen
and prunes the stragglers , when too wide they spread :
canto lxi . kausalyá ’s lament .
the virgin snood did alice wear ;
desolate league upon league , ice - pack and tundra and hill ;
i hide his face , lest she should see
that bred the man who broke the sin that bonaparte planned ;
a red bolt winged with wrath and flame .
he sytteȝ þer i{n } sodomis , þy seruau{n}t so pou{er}e
then your fever soon will cool . "
what we gain or what we lose ?
each man , as best he may , push on his bark " ) ,
what poet e'er could sing a note ?
it passed to god . the music was
or waste away in a sudden depth of water .
and threatened him with bolts and bars .
how strange it seems
wic ofer wongum .       wennan gongum .
universal reproach , far worse to beare
which held to juno in a cheerful way ,
but wanton darts ne're pierce where honours found ,
the delicate hues of brow and cheek
or kneel beside your bed ,
dead or asleep .
go , mary , wipe her tears away ,
when summer smiles serene ;
that is the life of a man .
till by the helpe of a laborious guide ,
_ where nature has to act resigned , _
thy longer stay , that thou may'st not depart
while flora , sitting where tall trees appear ,
i that through the land of hellas
bellows , hurls stones .... not even a honeyed sop ...
that tint or stone bestows ;
and then to shapeless air unseen she glides .
rojos de llorar los ojos ,
choice spirits of her isle ? what could avail
but most throughout the moral world ,
distinct and burnt into my brain ,
and i wrote my happy songs
of blossom , over sheets of hyacinth
and what ( he chooses not before thee to display ,
bota de ante , espuela de oro ,
" my tories leap with joy . "
far from passion , pain , and guilt ,
que ni poso en ramo verde ,
how doubly severer , maria , thy fate ,
his mate feels the eggs beneath her wings ,
the flame ! the flame ! the envious flame !
and the folk will tell you how he
and gladly would have done ,
is incensed , an enduring goal !
lest from my god in lonely death i lapse ,
he took her youngest on his arm
shall be , as one is , all clean razed out ,
the christian host throughout is overthrown ,
all american authors who have more or less
at the last one of which he knocked and entered .
we , too , had good attendance once ,
seems held and folded in by golden noons ,
i feel a sharp and sudden poke
the green - embosomed hamlet fires !
with th ' arch of heav'n that triumphs or'e past wet ,
though you can fashion everything
elfin exquisite shadows flowing
making her mere - breathed name
what _ would _ you do , if you were me ,
all for a dusty clearin ' ,
diligite justitiam were first verb and noun of all the picture ;
most beautiful of all the island - birds ;
from all the earth . " listen ! for the third seal
hand in hand , the two women sat down undescried ,
sometimes an extract from an ancient book ;
in the old lonely house .
afield already , in his livery dight ,
and hither came i through the infernal anguish .
that i found along the wayside ,
now die!'--so speaking , to the shrine he tore
courageous as yourselves , soon priam 's towers
now meeter far for martial broil ,
folds her white arms , and bends her laurel'd brows ;
an ' he come in to talk .
issues , ere yet the horrid storm infests ,
filth too foul for printer 's ink ,
to search the meaning of what here thou seest ,
the stars over - head ,               its guerdon may earn.--
each one forthwith to his sad tomb repair ,
i ' ave to change me shirt , an ' wash me face ,
thence arose three mighty rivers
there 's hornpipes and strathspeys , man ;
and creation would be singing still its old primeval psalm .
invariable tendency , and operates upon the whole system of life ,
an ' see her gleed e'e raxin ' back
the poems . this is due to observance of the text of the
unlucky , as fungoso{8 } in the play ,
the cynic devil in his blood
but such a sacred and home - felt delight ,
it has a strip of grassy mould
and incense sweetened all the place .
not on graves of birds or beasts alone ,
heart - broken outcast , with an exiled band ,
the song of praise we sing,--
your lordship needs not be told , that the roman poet who had the
some of us use a word or two .
light - hearted , trustful folk
and suck his tiny thumbs ,
festinantis opus : non est tam sordida diuis
what had been vice with them to you the honest
thy son -- the sacrifice divine ,
multitudes , multitudes ,
a fount of slander , flattery and spite ;
oh , ye so fiercely tended ,
round the whole earth his dreaded name shall sound
three false sisters : ' perhaps , ' ' may be , ' ' i dare say . '
will you give me a thousand guilders ? "
drink i , eagle , still the fiery rain
or if their odorous bloom thou dost deny ,
watching the stark form , stretched out still ,
belinda now , whom thirst of fame invites ,
the young wife counted anxiously ,
sleep gins close the labourer 's eye :
of thy son , good uncle mine ! "
to draw in a stark light a shameless deed ,
brilliant ; but his pretence of sinking the author in the friend
  there is no light but that which proceeds from god , the light
of birds at noon - day ; and no soft throats yield
the living throne , the sapphire blaze
beggar'd by wealth , who starves that he may save ,
can heave its depths at any hour ;
" if gold or wealth , of most esteemed dear ,
or from achilles , slain in open fight ,
with moses ' law and david 's lyre ,
and they yell you where .
he does not fear the master -- knows no fear--
ere was born the metal , iron .
past the cliffs where flock the seagulls ,
and golden sceptre of the god shaft - arm'd .
i know , i know your art ,
and joy the art of true believing ;
the sun is set ; and in his latest beams
“ that thou dream’st little engel thus
sealed with a seal and safe forevermore--
they are waves that drown you ,
for their hearts are overflowing .
yet better comfort to lurcanio feigns ,
falls and ascends
the swine - herd , faithful to his num'rous charge .
would you not wonder , sir , to view
the pope received them with great pomp and blare
i will not ask her ! ' twere a fruitless task ,
i burn , and gains , my will thus hid i stay ! "
dark and untimely met my view,--
to trundle over .
o'er all their banners waving o'er her ,
went out queens and lost their crowns and came back slaves .
and swing with me , and memory , upon the shoogy - shoo .
but atlas maia too begot , if we may trow tale told ,
an ' fear nae wintry rain , lassie .
nay , even when moving in the bounds of life ,
|                 |for it .        |               |for it .        |
weeps the fair sister - land , with whom ere while
oh , stranger , should you linger near , drop on this lonely grave a
unwilling , alone we embark ,
should set a sculptured porpoise , gills a - snort
on the wilful face of skies ;
will make them war upon the nubians ' reign ,
the name -- ticonderoga ,
falls in its chair , a clanking hulk .
through the skins of fox and beaver .
to that strange desperate voyage o'er the sea .
on harmless recreation ; who reviles
nor good dry land : nigh founderd on he fares ,
that stood for ages still ,
that mother had !   she 's so like her ! '
and many a faithful wife beside
heard not the heavenly throng
brazen bells !
and for this reason doth the smallest round
hark to the music !   how beneath the strain
and from her throne the dark - browed night
gemmea sint lugdis : ignibus ista dabis .
struck blind by thee , resigns his days to grief ,
when nature 's face is fair ,
to wear about his legs so tall .
thy soul desires , since the immortal gods
making the blood strain back from their blanched faces
now you 'd scarcely care to meet
so i with begging dish and ready tongue
sent by an hand unseen ;
right upon her temples fair ,
they danced to the flute of the blue baboon ,
meet after long divorcement by the isles ;
bearing with manly feelings the woman 's heroical greatness .
therefore they separate , exclaiming , ' sodom ! '
a score of other pasts and make a scene ,
to watch the battling pow'rs .
and sixteen bayonets pierced the seraskier .
_ now the great wheel of darkness and low clouds _
tom , green and silent in the swollen rhone ,
_ " we can not give them honor , sir .
yellow faces with leering eyes
god is good
the other , tongue pressed into palate , wondering whether the next
we enter -- nothing 's changed or older .
and in her eyes , a dream .
aeuro ~ sir , aeuro(tm ) he said , aeuro ~ i haue thy wede ,
and in its haven found the fleet arrayed .
tell him he rises now , too late
of the trojans , and ajax was first to speak . " alas , " said he ,
his witching words ,
of thought that made me yours again.--
keen , cruel , perceant , stinging : she , as well
fer as you could see .
when evening gray doth rise , i fetch my round
already arrived am inhaling the odorous air :
where the bear sleeps in the thickets .
through the roar of the hurricanes .
from morn to evening dews ,
both equal , both unconquer'd shall remain ,
upon the bord and dede hem sette .
along the psalmist 's music deep ,
and the clouds in sullen darkness rest
benign , and of our merit take no count .
making a garden of the desert wide
cirkling her middle , straight as any wand ,
from whom the answer came unto these words ,
and still our faith ( though faith be dead ) ,
yet to my irritated ear
of which the first group appeared in ` poetry ' for jan . , 1913 ,
her i did n't understand .
he smiled , and from his smile a genial glow
but in the inmost soul .
their baths and bowers were mine to dwell in for a day .
thus the magistrate spoke . the others departed and thanked him ,
as thyself art fair to gaze on ? "
shall i e'er behold thee more ,
amnis harundinibus limosas obsite ripas ,
or nature ; god and nature bid the same ,
' mang sons o ' god present him ,
and then about the slumbering palace
dried at their words , alas for me :
they grasp their arms in vain ,
write me how many notes there be
and to praise it , one needs but name it ;
or so little to be forgiven ? ...
in trust to make return to africk 's land .
and not the stroke of nine ;
the _ word_--so high i cannot -- dare not , rate it ,
is a lustrous laurel tree !
has freshness in her train ;
if you can quibble on sir _ robert _ 's name .
all these restless little creatures
that you have understanding , and come what may you shall not bear
of his mouth .   and wonderfully quiet now
into the fleet ; the spirits too he quell'd
are scattered far and melt like frost .
to pass ; this palace did the god contain .
with a huge empty flagon by his side :
with some that weene the contrarie in thought ,
when you 're grown golden and high !
march , children , ' gainst the foe ! "
accordin ' to yo ' station ! ' "
and a little glimpse of theocritus ,
that through the chariot fix'd his forked train ;
lord lilac did not come again .
and bathes the forest where she ranged before .
they have gone , like life 's first pleasures ,
why , why dost thou weep , dear ?
they left their coursers , and , unus'd to fight
i will go adown by the water
all the names i know from nurse :
shine where oft she paused and stood ;
then he spoke the words which follow ,
thee bold longinus ! all the nine inspire ,
the mind was well informed , the passions held
that was of public right ,
and we 'll be married ' fore hayin ' time . "
for me , i 'll keep the post assigned by heav'n ,
if her cold indifference wound thee ,
the beauteous eriboea , sought the aid
and the dashing of the foam .
nor yet can yeld , accompt if you were callde .
of winnowed snow , wrapped round it , fold on fold .
the march of hosts that haste to meet
that dwell herein in arcady ?
that he for him might pay sinnes deadly hyre ,
to seek a distant clime ,
there is no lorde duke kynge nor other estate
hasten straightway to the leafy places , where the copsewood is
so as he cam , so is he gon
and with down - cast eyes consenting ,
the potter in the neck him took ,
" that same first fiddler who leads the orchestra to - night
his borrowed form was fair and strange .
the hide of an ox of nine seasons old , which he let flay ,
can thy frail children close their ears for aye
the little engine on his fingers ' ends ;
' twas here she often tripped and fell
of eyes , and th ' eyes of argus would be such ,
' but never mind , + i 've cash at my command+ . '
will dare to soil her virgin purity .
comes weary home at night , but comes with joy :
from their dark idols , or their sorceries ,
he had n't at command . " you must excuse me ,
to shaddow forth th ' admired paragon .
" who never doubts the highest peak
and weak old winter himself must shiver ,
her teeth became so painful
or love , the life of song !
of wrath the maid assumed upon her part ,
she never shrank from penance rude ,
chat , joke , or gaze apart .
the alps of venice , far away
sing on , sweet thrush , upon the leafless bough ,
next to these names of the ideas of entire things , the words most
when light a footstep struck her ear ,
her tender young ones in the springing bent ,
for not a hope of life i see
and we grieve when you are angry ,
bot mihte i ben of such maistrie ,
as thy own actions if compared to mine .
moment later had succeeded in closing with the
call him a villain who , with greed of gain ,
that odysseus adventured the most grievous battle , and in
and thunders rend the howling air ,
who him had thither guided : as she lay ,
thus he , exulting : o'er iphition 's eyes
thereto . '
hallooing through the keyhole,--
till round it the ennobling sun has shone ;
nothing at all , to be exact !
the pot on the hob
o'pairs o ' guid breeks i hae twa , man ;
eyed like a gracious bird , and in both hands
gathering round with wings all hoar ,
to have walked hand in hand with love , and seen
all those who had known her before , to marvel greatly . moreover ,
hic sola haec duo sunt , exsul et exsilium .
gain the other . " and when my answer was heard , sordello and he
to have attempted , though attained thee not .
v. 75 .   that mortal . ]   can grande della scala , born under the
already with the gods thy father dwells .
towards the sea , to schort me on the sandis
been spoilt by an excess of " cooks . "
deplored thee in full choir with sweetest tones
somewhere in me there 's a woman , if you know the way to find her .
i see before me the gladiator lie :
the chancellor held up his hand :
deep in the earth?--or what of deadly bane
hath stimichon to me your singing praised .
not spirits , yet to heav'nly spirits bright
my way across the waste of it ;
the _ rimas _ . bécquer has been widely imitated throughout
with knowledge of all wisdom , had made wise
god bless the squire
a pretty boy of curious wit ,
took up the blackbird 's strain ,
who laughed at this thing .
faith , hope and love are given
that hath kept watch o'er man 's mortality . " ]
adown the burnie 's flowery bank ,
from harmony to harmony
then upon all sides there began a cry ,
incessant spouting , damp the sickening flames ,
stew or fry or boil your meat ,
your own thought passing into beauty , like
that other greeks may other contests wage . "
and weaves at her web . yet there is one whom i will tell
and smile to hear thy name ;
were white as drifted snows .
of his airy mountain cabin ,
seasons of blankness as of snow ,
whose singing robes were homespun brown
" i have come to catch some sea - trout ,
summoned his trembling daughters to their doom .
nevermore let northland - heroes
are charmed by her youthful graces
nearer now than e'er of old . _
so frail our natures that at times we pray ,
when i publish a book : " it is half like himself ; "
' sweet boy , ' she says , ' this night i 'll waste in sorrow ,
o , not earth trembles , but the stars , the stars !
the loving and the fair ,
and shall do like buffamalco ,
under the still sky 's violet
this evil have i known , and known but once ,
to think of them . i was too strange a lady .
wal some o’th ’ crookt - legg’d ens bethout of a scheam ,
ideal hopes dawn , fade , and reappear .
there was an old person of ware ,
we have crept from the house of love ;
yonder by the stove , which is a
polypoetes took the quoit he hurled it as though it had been a
the clouds hung low :
thou shalt never moan again .
wonder - smiths ' work , since the world was rid
gang about his business !
dazzled and spent , sunk down , and sought repair . ' "
as on the pageant sped .
looked up and oped their eyes ,
our loving eyes ,
at pastures star - covered from morning till night ,
the blue mist thin along the woodland bars ,
despairing , seeks to work us woe and shame
and now and then a little proudly stalk't ;
the epitaph in form of a ballad
wi gert lumps o ’ sewet at th ’ cook he d put in’t ,
and she it is who charges _ me _ ,
" we know the past , with all its ills and joys ,
each limb , each movement , naked as the day .
faith , we'se hae fine remarkin ' ! "
a mameluke fierce yonder dagger has drawn :
then muttering and moaning go the crowd ,
" in all such theories , " said he ,
" do not weep , and i will go to queen dew - drop , and beseech her
sir torent said : aeuro ~ be seynt iohn~ ,
will send for me ; for which i daylie long :
o woman , i have spared him for thy sake ,
and every other crown despise !
stay here , _ john _ ; we 've no _ secrets _ . _ g. m. _ surly put !
intelligence . "
speak thy desire ; i grant it , if thou ask
undis , ignibus , aere ,
return'd and gratious purpose thus renew'd .
took her in gently ,
a trace of bitterness or doubt
called him worthy to be loved ,
the pleasant land of rest is spread
then up and spoke that lady fair ,
taste -- difficult to explain to readers unfamiliar
have no thickets so rough or so dense .
a secret life , renewed forgiven sins .
those loved ones again ever see ,
strive not , vain lover , to be fine ;
in the jangling ,
learn how much stronger i am than you are , and that another may
did , as thou sawest , receive , to walk with god
swift at his command ,
engendered in the poisonous lake .
_ harden a spear _
of the proud pantheon of imperious rome .
and wreathed them with a campak garland ;
those kingdoms and crowns which your poetry pities ,
a necklace golden studded full
or whatso greater beast she may anywhere take , whereof the
she 's ailing for ever -- my welcome is small ,
  de quincey 's works , vol . viii . p. 14 .
but when in paris
o it 's i that am the captain of a tidy little ship ,
o'erjoyed was he to find
when strength is feeble , and friends forsake ,
they were learnin ' the regular work of our corps ,
and think , poor man , ' tis only given
but in a sympyll vyllage , ferme or grange
sets hell 's last seal of misery -- hopelessness !
all the beams are wood of apple ,
over their heads -- so , midst some little mirth ,
at last he woke up to a sunny day ,
so it kept the troublesome tartars out .
from childhood 's day this son of toil ,
that i pay meat and fee ,
_ and lakshmī devī be witness . _
the rugged trunk , indented deep with scars
lort send me aaron yet to holdt
night roared , with the heart - break hearing a heart - broke rabble ,
he drives compunction
bear light hearts and weightless freightage .
i await your pure hands , still
thus she thought , until a thought relieved her ;
so speakest thou , friend , how stronger far than i ;
their praise to patie birnie .
and presages of what will be !
upon your hidden face ;
nor wavers ; but the world shakes , and we shriek .
and for the time he knowth no wyht ,
i 'll own , with a certain zest ,
while the black blood drips down on the pale ivory ,
each morn a thousand roses brings , you say :
love is a greater power than vested might .
and now the third succeeding morning shone .
subject himself to anarchy within ,
i thought what myriads of the wise and brave
" no boys with girls shall play ! "
when we go out in armour
thus i embold'nd spake , and freedom us'd
that those his pains are fables , and untrue ;
in the long roll of any deep blue wave .
trumpet - tongued from the walls
when , through the scrub - lands wide ,
was i to blame , because his bride
whom no god pities .
when men and women , to try out their souls
what glistens on the anvil ?   sweat or tears ?
down in the garden .
constraining these to wither in old age ,
come , jollily trowl
with the night and minnehaha .
as though not fitly there ?
asopus , iii .
the pensive mother sits in humble state ;
all are scattered now and fled ,
falls from the farthest starriest way
to learn , and thus grew up a wise , good man .
come , i will take you down underneath this impassive exterior , i
the vision of that morning hour .
the love of thee and heaven -- and now they sleep
who makes all nature 's chords resound
and the playing fields below .
here in stern judgment of the oppressor 's wrong
we think of her now in a different stile ,
sweet , easy , pleasant , gentle , meek and light .
nor leaves his dry house though we come so near .
that give this little town its name .
is heavy with the fragrance they have lent ,
the winter months of scarcity to weather ;
the triumph of his constancy;--
and drinking bliss in every beam .
oh life ! and pride ! and honour ! come and see
hold to my lips thy healthful cup
gan reare his head , by clotho being waked :
a sign of wet weather to - morrow .   do n't scoff !
a staring eye and a vacant mood ,
many things he could not fashion ,
desire must ope the portal;--
lord of the race since the world began .
and in this pleasaunce , as by holy need ,
pan fu gyfeddach forach forfran .
and the calm stars did far and spare
sprach sich maister hilteprand . "
the church of saint maria novella . pass
and apollo made the high - souled polypheides a seer , far the
" all your little animals are in one picture--
she stands , her pleading face so young and fair ,
but tho ' his eyes are waxing dim ,
the bosom 's stainless pride ,
that god would ever guard and bless her--
now let some whimsy , or that devil within }
and the magic of its lineaments remains with me alone .
had fail'd not , but that he , whom curses light on ,
and he gave to the ladye , when thus he had spoken,--
and they may go ; " at which her two cheeks grew
but they must ope , this blessed league to kill ;
but strange , subtle chords , like the scent of the roses ,
but while unmoved their sleep they take ,
tears will unbidden start--
we , puppies that we were ... oh never
insulting death . so , with redoubled spleen
admittance here again three months to come .
forever and a day ,
the will of lady kriemhild might / none in all that land deny .
song , " wait but a little
that i may refresh my body ,
but danger , death , and warrior deed ,
( th ' enamour'd laurels kiss her brows ! )
why i tie about thy wrist ,
give up their parks some dozen times a year
come with me and i will make thee
the body of patroclus -- which offends .
and he was healed , in his despair ,
nor bred in simple ignorance .
rain from the mountains of ki - sho
and hope is dying in despair ,
the sword , not with a riot of flags and bands ,
confine in netted bowers his scaly flocks ,
to lie upon thy stall , till it be sought ;
married noble hiawatha ;
my true breast is overladen--
the swiftness of those circles attribute ,
as though it were a hundred years away ;
destroy the rovers of the night :
of private recollection sweet and still !
all of that worst ignominy
the feud for him , turns outlaw and leaves his kindred and
jove to his palace ; at his entrance all
  " ma race , " les forces tumultueuses .
" this woman 's heart and soul and brain
while his lithe form towered in lordly mien ,
now , rushing downward with the sinking waves ,
boast of it , to any one else who knows of the affair , and thus
there was an old person of pisa ,
it seem'd as if my lips approach'd
brooding on ancient fame .
cromwell was extremely strong throughout the 18th century , even
in slow descent , an eastern pyramid
when philomel her voice doth raise ?
than i would put a span of horses in ;
in the hedges and the whins
did not my fate my needful haste constrain ,
made myself ready to sustain the war ,
" that , " he replied , " is provenzan salvani ,
the needed grace to bear the more ,
shoulder them in , shoulder them in ,
yet stall , when thus in mirth you meet ,
wherof into this ilke day
the tartans filed their way ,
_ " ingenuous trust , and confidence of love . " _
and his sky - kissing peak of gold
dwelt in peace upon the hill - side ,
as those echoing steps ring round .
he too , when restored to his senses , visits arthur 's court , is
a deity adored , is joy advanced ;
oft with desire was good rinaldo stung
and eyed her fondly through his glass .
  voltaire , oeuvres , tom . xiv . p. 169 .
the butcher - work that there befell ,
and kindle earth with valour 's dying breath ;
gather violets in the meadows ,
with music sweet as love , which overflows her bower :
here , comrades , rest : no farther go :
and a fierce great mouth , wide open spread ,
yet i by _ certain marks _ can know ,
round the inn - door , all busy drinking ,
stood dolefull shee .
purposed with honor to fulfil .
the city dedicate to bacchus mourn'd ,
who o'er verona 's champain try their speed
the fellow slyly raised a sash
green each bursting leaf - bud swells
if _ you _ lent your playthings , i think you would say things
glancing , his tail upturn'd its venomous fork ,
you want not antiquity 's stamp ,
my love in thy garden , there waiting for me !
though round his sides a wooden tempest rain ,
the south is mistress of his grave .
hereafter blest , though adverse now and hard !
no more thy lip - touch on my brow ,
the richness of his spring - head : and as sound
that rides so rank , and bends his lance so fell ? "
the earthly stream we trace and know ,
of fire in her hand , her tresses crowned
" round me what a large progeny is spread !
... had reached the door ,
so much delights me , as those graceful acts ,
a lady with a lamp i see
and valiant lakshmaṇ , dear to fame ,
a sweeter incense stole;--
do their week - days ' work , and pray
was not thus much incommoded ;
which in days of old the fauns and bards used to sing , before
ah me ! ah me ! to awake and sigh --
he swept therewith , and rolling o'er his carcase warm with death ,
i do not doubt that the passionately - wept deaths of young men are
those shapes of sin , which hot blood held as vain .
but , at the coming of the milder day ,
by those who for themselves , their tents and ships ,
who , they trust , will soon amend . "
the drawers have forgot thee , and exclaim
fell and perished in the hurdles ,
such fears
the nightingale began his golden song ,
there 's an old and haggard demi - rep , it 's ringing in her ears ,
oh ! who can read of all his heart - felt woes--
he chose a consort to prolong his line .
by mrs . george sheldon downs . illustrated . 12mo , cloth . $ 1.50 .
she , aye by beetling cliff and darksome dell ,
when the calesians and the picards yielding ,
and whether that my angel be turn'd fiend ,
so beautiful , through savage lands
oedd ammau ir byd bod abar o honam ,
then to the desert breeze unrolled ,
his supper ?
for slowthe , and kepte noght my tide ,
not dead , not dead , as dreamers feigned ,
the north wind doth blow
all cunning things that creep and fly
nor was't alone their avarice or pride ,
yes ! thou shalt be my maiden now !
to goodly themes applied ,
will i : to zeus 's mansion will i go
broadly around him , made the same ?
on shore are the ghosts of drowning cries
as in eden lands of old ;
if this day 's doings thou hadst left undone
  ' anaer morionous , a phrase which i have borrowed from a greek
full oft the men of thuringia / they met in tournament ,
again would she appear under the black roof of the ark .   nor was
become an undistinguishable roar .
his orders that i have committed the sins of which i am
prood did ye gang ;
' the world is very evil . '
though your voice may seem as a dove 's in this howling flood ,
who goeth a warfare , or hunting , alone ?
a hope , a happiness ,
were once our beings blent and intertwining ,
in echo as the rainy torrent poured ;
the tumult each wonder - struck inmate alarm'd ;
leans toward the bed ,
not having the wit to get hold of the rein ;
to divide the priceless treasure .
among the chieftains ; true he rarely lent
hudson 's last voyage
with his dark - lantern mind , unled , alone ,
now at the word a light sprang in rahero 's eyes .
whan pride is with envie joint ,
and come to the war with me . "
" upon the goodness of offended god !
their constant rippling 's heard the village round ;
or borne in trust ? and for her sake
and will give a dress of feathers . "
appointed signal was designed to be a safeguard against them . "
no matter what our trouble is , when he begins to coo ,
and i will give thee a gown of silk ;
and across the open water ,
issuing from me : on your joint vigour now
fierce odes to famine and to slaughter ;
indifference . ]
came these hollow accents , blent with softer murmurs
then from his cloudy heights he lowers ,
and say i come ,
and nights devoid of ease ,
with due reward , his thanks expressed ;
that floods the mist of february with may ,
yet ice - cold , changelessly melancholy ,
where freckled flowers paint the wold ,
of service -- a maiden , his sweetheart :
and hath unto the lordes seid ,
some gentle words of pleasure , and he wept .
to lay it in her bosom , while the tears
tis time enough hereafter to repent ,
into the twilight ; as a watchman lifts
looking for their trains .
what lily lilier than her face !
he deem'd it churlish in ungracious haste
the universe unfolds ; all properties
let me taste the old immortal
unlighted of taman to where the stream
and soon the lobby hummed .
in dead men breath .
stately empires wax and wane--
in the summer just passed over ,
o for some honest lover 's ghost ,
but after , in the spirit realm , refresh
something that could not be hers , my queen !
my reflections on halleck short off by the middle ,
they pour sleep on their head ,
sche was somouned and assent
from cato 's noble breast instinct with truth :
at her feet , i should fancy ; would soften the cold ,
not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land ? "
king ludeger 's men to take them in sooth were nothing coy ;
walking on the lawn alone ,
fear ! with her husband by her still ?
on the foamless , long - heaving
a lulling murmur weave?--
protesilaüs ! by great hector 's spear
that holds the feelings in their course ;
but the kiss was less passionate !
for it rains , rains , rains ! ”
' only for the blanky horses walkin ' over him all night . '
the keel and the mast of the daring sail ;
that pines , my love ,
another wheel that we may find .
in scaenam missos cum magno pondere versus ;
now mother venus , sore at heart for her sore - wounded son ,
which had received our precious freight :
infernal hounds of shambling ghouls !
to starving minds such is god cupid 's dish .
joys to observe his bold resistance .
and serve and reconcile ; and , maybe , teach
all simulated . and your prayer to god
o my tolerant soul , be still ! but you talk of barbarians ,
to shame the whiteness of the rose .
and manie yong plants spring out of her rinde ;
and gently set it in her slender hand ,
call thee the lesser mystery at the feast
" now , brother , rede ye mee ;
it stares through the window - pane ;
his heart against the sea ’s and sky ’s
to mortals , of their little week ;
the garden of the world erewhile ,
there , the beer that thou deservest ! "
can emblem see
in one our broken many blend ,
and when they kiss
for i have never yet been overthrown ,
wells as an echo all wildly frail ,
brought visionary looks ,
when its sounds from the ear have long melted away .
and laughs for youth in shrill and ringing tones .
' tis in man 's love : all else is nothing worth .
with all its crowded houses and its colored shops a - stream
and is accounted vanity and air !
myself , you will find me a more valuable friend than viscus or
and i painted her sitting there .
to ram the damned on their infernal thrones .
they look , when this their features fills ,
songs may inspirit us,--not from his lyre ;
bearing along with it , entangled in immensity 's onward
there 's a regret
buffet it , porto bello , back to the nile once more .
if but the woman 's truly such ,
upon its guidance : then soft music
then that which by creation first brought forth
tells of countless sunny hours ,
" no , " said the tree .
whence breaks the rose and all the flowers that greet
on christmas eve the bells were rung ;
and through the drifts the snowy clifts
ukko , then , of gods the highest ,
they sang , they shouted , the _ marseillaise ! _
even such was i in that dense multitude ,
were friends from the trojan camp come by hector 's orders to bid
and who would suppose
a little farther off upon the sand
the girl and goat;--for thenceforth , day by day ,
will laugh above the rain - soaked earth
looked kindly on his sufferings .
in skill or valour over - confident ,
canto xxx . sárdúla ’s speech .
that all things it is possible to paint
pity poor fighting men , broke in the wars !
almighty foe to ill , such favour shew'd ,
thy coldness puts to flight my joy .
now as eternally is past and gone
portabant phaleras in littore sicco equi gestientes . "
lovely thy tarrying , lovely too is night :
greece gathers up again her glorious band !
whether you everywhere be trying ,
old soldier !
the sparkle of the red or gold .
i sent you forth to vex and gall 'em ,
it would be easy for me , my dear stock exchange ,
in value that it drags down every balance ,
in plenty thus the summer pass'd ,
she made , and having laid him in , his bed ,
and every diamond the show girl wears ,
but dipped its top and set me down again .
and though the press may not receive it ,
a beached king 's galley , whose sails are furled ,
thus singing , through the air the angels swam ,
a secret and accumulating fund ;
where is thine admired beauty , dorian corinth , where thy crown of
scorches and burns our once serene domain .
sae bricht , sae young , could dee ,
a song now and then will enliven the heart ,
their sides are many , too,--and all
and left him ' midst the invalid and maim'd :
while another one said ,
* quisieram * , quisiera me .
tongue would thereby be facilitated . i am aware that
and you are flown :
it was a mickle wonder / that e'er her life she kept .
as i have not had time yet to consider it as maturely as i intend
looking closely at the glass windows of my shop ,
and promis'd much , but meant not to perform .
to them who sit by kirtle 's braes
" ' tis for nought your gold you squander ,
“ now the first night has closed the day
duncan gray cam here to woo
but great anchises , far above the rest ,
the gardener was covering his new - set plants
roll in a sunset sea :
within the gates ; but soon as they perceived
" too soon he died ; it is not well"--
that those within may have no issue free
from sea to sea . spain claimed the pirate 's head
answered lively lemminkainen ,
foul superstition ! howsoe'er disguised ,
this eve intense with yon first trembling star
who did not understand .
and kep thi wittes that thou hast ,
he 's not the " clean potato " ,
some grief - drowned bassarid ,
and the owls moaned from the mighty trees ,
singing through thy mother 's fenlands ,
what varied , changing magic hues
apostasy , by what befel in heaven
our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought .
that make him a merchant , or a vintner " at the corner of kirton
grief there will be , and may ,
while with a vacant soul and eye
with my brows in the boughs of the mulberry tree !
this useful lesson for the fair and young .
he on far other but an hour before
if maggie will have no rival , i 'll have no maggie for spouse !
the sheriff stern with gloom ,
" what devil was't
that does abroad their secret preach ,
send us the song of the sea to hear .
like silent streams
and deide , and he was hool in haste .
all things immortal .   crowned be thou with light
in this abundant earth no doubt
i would not be a shaven priest ,
to speculation and the worldling 's dreams ;
with radiant momentary hues,--
no power can the impenitent absolve ;
the soul is wrought
weeping , he said to me : " if through this blind
“ when me and acis , heedless of such fate ,
of polyhymnia and her sisters fed
and bow at her and bob at her ,
fridolinus , when returning ,
cloth - of - gold of buttercups outspread ;
in the imperial palace that march morn ,
methinks no leaf would ever bud in spring ,
would sate his greedy passion ; but forbore
at that moment he heard a sound .
such is my race , and such the blood i boast ;
hot was the day ; she hotter that did look
the owl is in the ivy - bush ,
but hell itself conceived and spawned the military germans !
hide me , where i may never see them more!--
sticking above the pocket 's edge a banner ,
when i began the world first ,
i can meet the wolf of lempo ,
could he not do his dreadful duty ,
perhaps a little strange , if not quite new ,
come you back and let me out ! "
had she any fault at all ,
folly and co. , will try to please you .
should share such shame as mine--
agramant and marsilius ; next in place
then in clear sky the thunder tolled
when fast they fall in fight .   their shield from harm
i would be waiting , lord ,
luggage of war there shewn me -- argument
far over the breast of the waters wide
but no one laughed save he that made the jest ,
nor could assist the craven in his need ;
with this reflection in his head :
at perseus hurl'd the quivering spear,--in vain !
gorges on her blood and entrails ; dogs and shepherds raise a hue
of the crowded thoroughfare !
heaven 's attribute distinguished -- to bestow !
smitten with sleep ; then round their dreams he cast
the relic of her perished race .
twa lovers frequent on me wait ,
in cogitation the thought or attention flits aimlessly about the
to that glorious sun at dawn .
we 'll show ' ee john pengelly then
that highte the tabard , fast by the bell.<59 >
craftiness in its self - set snare , and makes
you 'd better mīn ' mosser an ' keep a stiff lip ,
time will fly , time will fly--
on lips so pure as thine i see ,
" there is something greatly needed ,
in his despite and thine , to cross and curse
unfold thy will , and whence thou art in fine ,
gray like wet morning skies ,
as cherishable as the suns of spring ?
  for this title the author is indebted to mr . charles g. d.
who for such lofty mounting has with plumes
which disgusted that man of columbia .
arose and knelt before him , wept a rain
punishment of death on a young man , who , inflamed with love for
straighten myself by thy right line again .
the ' martyr king , ' the obstinate and weak ,
that e'er he told a secret to his dame .
no longer far -- no veil of flesh will dim
weel blackguarded them a ,
is to buy --- up at the price he is worth ,
presented a much admired tragedy in three acts , called
for the forked flash and long tumultuous roll ;
swollen and dirty with shame .
all in a hot and copper sky ,
the occurrences in this dream seem to have been suggested by the
he prayed and clasped the altar . his request
for whether they 're great ones , or whether they 're small ,
evil and good alike , beheld
thy counsell well it liketh mee ,
but i know , i sho do , dat pesky ole mule
that fell , refracted , thro ' thy bounds , afar
breathing a silence suffocating , sweet ,
upon their god who knew their soul 's desire ,
and that 's very clear .
of the wide world i stand alone , and think
behold ! here in this green graveyard
" i 'd choose for church a beauty :
what do i see !
flung like the rose of dawn across the sea ,
there never was a just one ,
the room is empty
friend 's love to strangers though no word were said ,
o'er her bridal dress were scattered ,
and bore the drink of heaven away
this is what some term growing up , or destiny , or fate .
and leaders of the lycian host assail'd
friend , art afraid ?
ran wild with clamour and clash of startled bells ;
o you who drain the cup of life , o you who wear the crown ,
fair as a cloud in autumn skies .
keen for the conflict ,      covered with shields ,
took the ten steps at a leap .
when dian ' from the chase retreating faint
made beautiful by love 's endearing grace !
that youth am i!--(with what surprize you gaze ! )
every one of his household of the male sex bear that
their rush of thunder:--blood - red sinks the day .
as when from melted snow a streamlet overflows ;
over the earth !   since that river 's release
unfailing ever , must there ever be
murmur at this ; and , if the public dances
thus farr at least recover'd , hath much more
was plac'd the lance auruncan actor wore ;
the deep . long time the water kept him under , nor could he
( hark ! how those plangent comforters call and cry ! )
it is a summer evening , calm and fair ,
there creeps a foot , there sighs a breath ,
deeply down beneath the billows ,
when soft showers descend , something whispers to me ,
have walked a long , long way .
ended foul in many a scaly fold
when cooling shadows creep along the grass ,
since he kissed them and put them there .
above in thy life wins grace in heaven that so advances them . " at
as he that met his likeness in the stream :
and happiest he , that greatest haste could make .
till his hot foetor choked me , and his tongue ,
every day without a change ,
begins among her silent bars to climb .
as he watches the millstones a - grinding away :
for guard we as we may ,
with some hydra - headed wrong .
i knew thee when thy heead wor black ,
the church , and around it in its marble wall were four
but as the danube could not well be waded ,
that little , heavenliest !
johnson price , the chosen captain ,
rush prone from the sky like summer hail .
we haste to see a weird show ,
would wa(c ) could teach our sons
sway in worship round about
man 's theatre they bear with ease ,
on till the waves divide ,
why not ?   what would'st thou say ?   speak , fret me not
in the forward trenches , at close of day ,
go and kiss your lady :
o lord my god , that glib - tongu'd aiken ,
a bull by stopping of its breath ,
the warlike menelaus and myself
purpose of warming water . it was formed of brass , and expanded
and will awake . bring wine , and new - wound wreaths
was to you :   but i thought again :   i feared
would shrink to hear th ' obstreperous trump of fame ;
thus brandimart to afick 's cavalier ;
and thus disfigured and disgraced
from under the manger they 're taken ;
now , like a ghost , alone i move
but -- since they will not hear thy call ,
the prince himself in eager haste
is but a garnished nuisance , fitter far
moved only ; but by genius , in the strife
their full tribute never miss
and virtue vanquish all , and murder cease to thrive
" yes , " wanhope prompted .
mark with what exalted mien
where as enuy thy conscyence shall blynde
thet 's fair an ' square an ' parpendicler ,
levied a kindly tax upon themselves ,
learns he nothing , even of grief ?
he 's reelin ' hame ae winter 's nicht ,
one part , one little part , we dimly scan ,
among my skimming swallows ;
and hither brought by tristram for his last
and every day he crept to see the drillin ' on
up before light , and home in the night ,
the valiant knight of denmark bore high his quivering spear ,
but just the other day i made a whistle from a reed . '
plough not the seas , sow not the sands ,
king cole 's son , in that forest held his court ,
' tis midnight 's holy hour , and silence now
dear as remembered kisses after death ,
faith in the future wanting , is , at least
then rouse , ye gods , and vindicate your sway .
shall i remember , and then all forget .
rage burn'd within , and robb'd his soul of rest ;
thou bidst me sing .
' tis not on couch o ' velvet ,
as to what his fate was ; but i can not imagine he
bacchus view'd the charming sight .
are turned and twirled , or twist about ,
be kind , gods , to me !
here must we stay , weighed down with grief for this ,
the west leads on a host , to cure the drouth
e'en human love will shrink from sight
man 's are , if indeed he is still among the living . if he is
that out of your life they seem .
the man who is left behind .
and not the living sin . "
o amor atque tuae gloria magna togae :
send them to make search . but as i came and drew nigh to
balls of lead
unto my guide , and turned mine eyes to him .
fine feathers do not always make fine birds .
and not seek for kind relief ?
" that drop descends contagion dies
now turn the big wheel of the mill ,
and he gazed on the tattooed limbs , and , behold , he knew the man :
i scatter’d slaughter from my fatal bow .
as i , accordingly perverse ,
the wood - thrush drops a cool contralto note ,
when years go by
where now is midmost in my world ?
suddenly appeared a white - faced man among us
crown'd with the ears of corn , now come ,
then spake unto them kriemhild : / " now bear with me my need . "
this the language of the blacksmith ;
nobody heard him and nobody saw ,
ah , yes , philosopher , thy creed is true !
lately with brutal rage assaulted you ,
the bacon hung suspended from a beam ,
the fyr of his condicion
amonges al the remenant
of fierce extreams , extreams by change more fierce ,
canes with a brilliant lacquer shine ,
but the strains of " yankee doodle "
of human battle , where my voice ,
my laughter bubbled over then .
and , tell him to be speedy with his lancet ,
let us sit down and drink o ' our beer ,
at the corners of the heavens ;
as now the trait'rous north with icy flaw
may no demons , no ill , no calamity or terrifying dreams
and bore me down an eddying gulf ;
thou would'st bid thy servant share
" now when thou sangest the relentless weapons
etna scorcheth in days of drouth ,
o’er living things . love , thou art gone astray !
the dust , he pour'd it on his rev'rend head
and divers toys fitting a country fair ,
led them a little way , and thence
a spirit of snow and rain unheeded calls .
like thoughts whose very sweetness yieldeth proof
why do ye weep , sweet babes ?   can tears
for of late i have fretted and sulked , and clung to my books
christened , at home , in worlds of dawn and dew :
to carry that wonderful nose .
prepar'd against that day ,
with what a light his dark eye glows !
and he wonders why the music .
hollow , and dark , and blue ,
ere the crocus bold ,
to seek a standing near her honored throne .
who had to be cold and ashen
description , wretched : such a wherry
" i do n't believe you ever did care . "
signum quod ipse nosti
has left our city desolate .
dost thou now please thy thirst with berry - juice ?
of the iron axe that hammered
poppy beside the deeply - crimsoning rose ,
long , long ago , in dear provence , we three !
" _ let us in ! let us in ! we have fallen for the right ,
with its ridgepole bent and broken in the centre ,
less for a woman 's lips than i ?
into the fire before me then he walked ;
the married couple , thank their stars
so i guess you 're like me when i talk , and i talk , and i talk all
all the solemn spaces flung .
una nueva desdichada :
sacred ark king david danced .
the kings of the north they were scattered abroad--
cheats most mine eyes , albeit my heart ,
shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon
my heart is singing a song today .
hear me with patience .
and quietly die
his crime was monstrous , but he won me over .
the singer , binds a chant on the lyre 's chords .
shall banish tyranny and wars forsooth ,
forms the green _ cup _ with many a wrinkled fold ;
pleasure , first , succours virtue ; in return ,
and ever looking for the never seen .
and bloodier yet the torrent flow
' twas her lips on his , until
then as a man constrained , the tale he told
ceased not to ply her sword with circling stroke .
that made the breeze to blow .
dripped down with viper 's venom .   this alone
and then within my pagan heart awoke
more tuneable then needed lute or harp
i 've liv'd a life of sturt and strife ;
in me that father ’s reverend image trace ,
for me alone messiah died !
and i do not deny that terrible red birth and baptism ,
heavily sank he , as a stone sinks ,
on a lady famed for her caprice .
' twill be the worse for't all the year .
and in the shades of falling day
but could we women write as scholars can ,
and sharp and eager driveth on the storm
are as ribs of me unhappy ;
awful with splendor , and his august head
for their refusing to participate
the noble prophet then , approaching , drank
when we have done this muster , unto me ,
does he sing or whistle , jabber or talk ,
lovingly linger to ponder and gaze ,
that he the werre noght poursuieth ,
so much she said , and wrapped her round with mantle dusky - grey ,
and when the seer had ended these sayings he commanded his people
shall surely be o'erthrown .
like folded wings,--and there were millions of them ,
are drawn with the truest and most delicate hand .
" your flowers , your verdure , and your balmy gloom ,
" this applause , i grant you , oft
on the long spear outgasping her last breath ,
private .   what would you ?   to proceed:--
like the paradise of god before our lord gave over sodom and
sap and sweetness .
and all the fruits wherewith in early bloom
the " kentucky news " informs her ,
to learn if all had held their grip
was completed ; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got
the sword that he waved as he fell ,
did heaven bestow its quenchless inner light ,
" si lunga tratta
so thus i found my true love 's house again
( his characters being society leaders ;
a pipe with an enormous bowl ,
and to his cot withdrew .
do such a dede as thou hast do ?
thy brother death came , and cried ,
the entrails of the offer'd bulls consum'd
more grand , more full of awe , than all that change ,
true as that heaven and earth exist .
" wine is allfather 's drink , and the cup is allowed if you
which else pale flowers of tartarus would grow ,
the night - lamp 's flare across her face ,
the canvas is torn ,
than they could have been carefully plotted before :
for they wanted to o'erthrow me ,
a rider , bound on bound
have you , perchance , elsewhere begun ?
nine arbiters , appointed to intend
no mood , which season takes away , or brings :
our cause more honest , and our hearts as great ;
complete , alone ,
of god 's glad universe ; stars , moon and sun ;
and all our past be covered with regret .
thys fend wase ferly to fyght ,
nor aught surmised the havoc of his host
never before imprinted
her arms were like a lovely belt
and her crimson heart -- it was his alone--
a snake is summer 's treason ,
curl'd he is and ringleted , and plaited to the knee--
so much for the actors;--for secret machinery ,
till winds are hushed to hear,--
struck with amaze and shame , the trojan crew ,
and with nothing at home but starvation and riot ,
not a shadow of sound there is
forth on his great apostleship he far'd ,
that sense of intimate wonder!--now again ,
he 'd jes ' a ' drapped there in his tracks .
of ravening hunger i must drain my blood
and so -- he sings .
the colours that he carries in his brain
a herald of the million bills ;
on every corse there stood .
without a streak of heaven 's soft blue
but lo ! this rock ! we can not climb it , so
" rat , rat , gnaw rope ;
befriends the brave , the monarch owns his joy ,
but yours , boys who were children once .   of old
could not see your heart of passion ,
gain'd for her own a scanty sustenance ,
when roses fell , and summer died ,
by the spirits of the water ! "
stick _ yours _ on the point of mama 's parasol ,
und doch dem ausdruck die frische farbe des lebens zu verleihen . ’
borne by swifter feet than ours ,
to which the prophetic breeze
sure i should want the care of ten monroes ,
before he leaves a market town ;
it took him hard , it ran his ribs all lean ,
culling whatever floweret bloomed
like ter see the brooks and ponds dimpled up all over ,
another , wiser , will prefer
genius , art , practice -- i might not so speak ,
lake .
heaven is not built of country seats
at midnight i beat the tattoo ,
jock randal is my name . "
hour is close at hand !
his vision penetrated deep ,
i ' ve seen the lily of the wold , vol . iii . , 48 .
the sun is not a - bed , when i
in that great tower aïdoneus built
the hospital service , the lint , bandages and medicines ,
you keep
the souls whom that unhappy flame invades ,
the dog was of novel breed ,
some will be suited near the poles ,
peace to my soul to bring
to fill up such places as may be to fill ;
to a huge mountain , cover all the town .
the heron flapped in the river reeds ,
operating with his learning and his gallant bearing . elsewhere
now flamed the sun in the meridian high ,
must we not grant that mind and soul consist
your obliged humble servant ,
and these few left , are drowned and dead almost
weep , weep not for the mariner ,
that in the act of seizing shrinks to nought .
and now a hearty smack !
' prater , ave atque vale'--as we wander'd to and fro
it is no tale ; but , should you think ,
if sche speke oght ayein his wille ;
sheer o’er the crystal battlements from morn
then -- the red fight through ,
" moolly - cow , moolly - cow , down in the meadow ,
very dear to hiawatha
life 's voyage in vain
upon his lashes still a trace of tears ....
and look for age , in wine :
i said , my dear soldier , i beg you would stay ;
escaped i know not how , for he was dead ;
feasted , and every one had his full share , so that all were
it falls on field and tree ,
a leader of the vánar race .
fer me , awl tack me poor oud bones ,
dante , an essay by the late dean church , is the work of a learned
for , perched in black against the blue ,
with greasy nose they lick the casseroles ;
for i 'll aye find a friend in my muckle meal pock .
and now invoked the gods , and the cold shade
how on the barbarous laestrigonian coast ,
the nymphs withdrawn , at once into the tide
which gathers shadow -- substance -- life , and all
the violet in her greenwood bower
raised reverent hands with one accord ,
the father forward ran , in dreadful fear ;
so they ; and now addressing to the queen
in mazy circles dancing !
to lift their forms .   then two i mark'd , that sat
shall cease ;
and with weak hands her clinging gown she raised ,
i 'd rather hungry go and come ,
the bars of the springs below :
the dahlia dons its gay cockade ,
renew our former pledges undefiled :
the shaft found entrance in his iron breast ;
where , gathered near , ye may gaze your fill
et cum saeva tuas fudisset iberia turmas ,
" arise , o sigurd , sigurd ! in the night arise and go ,
" no cloister - floor of humid stone
but ah ! we children never more
were then . "
by the fall of its fingers
the rose is out of town .
the boy -- she called him merlin -- a love name --
and propagation never could have brought
dejado había atrás el carretero
to see an angel , gay with wings ,
roushan beg , called kurroglou ,
i saw that holy city rising clear ,
in the rippling groves of spring .
spake the hero , lemminkainen :
in short in matters vegetable , animal and mineral ,
those simple kindly folk .
and of the holy serpent , and the welle ,
weigh justly , throw good and bad in
to walk among the stars in light .
where fervors melt , or frosts congeal--
we dare n't go a - hunting
but an empty vaunt--
and , mounted both upon a single car ,
and how far its tour had extended .
grass with green flag half - mast high .
full many a prowest warrior thereafter lost his life .
there is a coldness in her speech , and a coldness in her eye .
in her love - darting eyes awakes the fires
with songs of sadness and of mirth ,
but now let thy face with rapture shine ,
and all his warrior - guests , with shade and form
and return to your mountains victorious .
desired to measure back his western way .
flashes of lightning !
like the camel 's last straws ,
achilles heard no voice so passing sweet ,
that all manner of men ,      and the mighty creation ,
the sea 's our field of harvest ,
the beauties of nature are losing their charms ,
as eastward still i staggered , there swam into my sight ,
where tears flow not forevermore !
as the rising of the tide
upon the most conspicuous theaters ,
he canty claw !
and forth withal yit natheles
' in my youth , ' said his father , ' i took to the law ,
that emperour is bold and combatant ,
_ papa 's watchfulness _
where mutton an ' beef 's to be bought so cheap .
though the sultan " shower'd favors upon him , " omar 's epicurean
even yet they were blind to the fact that the stranger had slain
the crown yet ill secure upon his front ,
at this her kind mama relented ,
of jubilee , with better speed to rid
" if an angel ever brings
and under the wild roses and the stars we will sleep ,
but kindled with quick courage to endure ,
no wild pinks bless'd the meads , no green the fields ,
nilus , ubi pronis praecipitatur aquis ?
come there this mornin ' , sez ' e 's come to stay ,
to keep your faith in me ,
it was a day of rest in heaven , which seemed
to see it melt like snow away--
nor his , who patient stands till his feet throb
i am afraid , afraid .
measur'd itself by none , it doth divide
they seemed to have some bitter thing to tell ;
a soothing murmur the lone region fills ,
the ingle neuk is gleesome still
no hand is found to mate king eochaidh 's king .
from the start boswell enjoyed courtenay 's company . in the first
hate that i could not tear away the lies
but passionate he spake--
why warn't i struck dead or paralyzed
by night at will ? all opposite powers upwhirled
spring sat dejected in a sheltered nook
then up , o lord of men , away !
here are no fish to dive for ;
there 's a holier chase in your view :
the hounds , and brandishing his massy spear .
" and in thy dungeon loathsomeness
and man to man in exaltation cried :
to - worship thir own work in wood and stone
and the devil knows what other subtle graces ,
a starless morning ,
_ adam . _                      night is near .
nor as from ordinary throats
’ tis only just his patriot brows should wear ,
he said his name was topper ,
hopes one day for reputation
nor song of bird , nor bird on wing ,
not so look i this business to have end :
quivers agleam , and all the east is white ;
though often sung by many wiser men .
she fell , and lay a minute 's space ;
well , let the world change on,--still must endure
ful man{er}ly w{i}t{h } marchal mad forto sitte ,
and the foumart lay his crawin !
fat vapors , mix'd with flames , involve the sky .
to heaven 's still gate ! now all is hushed as death ;
still like a shadow follows thee .
v. 41 .   a lady . ]   most of the commentators suppose , that by this
oh , summer - footed vivien came !
how dismal is his lot ;
when rollant sees those misbegotten men ,
and snap the froward pen ,
with sacrifice i called on love ,
she 'll dart forth , and cloudward soar .
the table bore a testament
for while so near each other thus all day
the kind man did as he was bid ;
it seems to me it 's awful bad
it seemed to me that new subsistences
rode the great captain alau .
haunting the wavering soul , so near the grave ?
if any of this god - like race remain ,
said cardinal antonelli , with a smile .
like one far blowing chime .
hear all ye gods ! as ye have given to me ,
and under thee their poesy disperse .
the roof - tree of your home , dear , it will be grand and
are not so pleasing as thy blest return.--warton . ]
" continue , " she answer'd , " i listen to hear . "
but in sorowe tymë for them all
shall i try her thoughts and write ?
the dingy room seemed curtained with gloom ;
with leaves of green by red shot through ,
and now i backward cast my eye
without effort , and quietly
her shadow did the maid appal;--
dragg'd in the dust , his frizzled hair to soil ,
the true virtuoso spirit . for the most part their enthusiasm is
dribble - dribble - trickle - trickle
how to train thy tender shootlet ;
and oh ! ' twas in a blessed hour
preferr'd to some proud face ,
hitotsu bakari wa
in the lust of my strength
oh , where are the faithful and true ?
and rocky mountains round the border rise .
naked gold and beryl green ,
the nuptial garlands for a god they weaved ;
push'd through a screen of roses . starry jove !
the spirit malign , but much more envy seized ,
the holy ghost , and the power of the highest
has the holy mother showed you this grace ,
warn’d the bearers to be steady ,
all valiant dust that builds on dust ,
did shine like the glistering gold .
his ready smile a parent 's warmth expressed ;
say to thy cares , good night !
when truth that is , and truth that seems ,
and set the whins afire ;
he hung in the air , self - slaughter'd .
new lambs among the sheep ;
just in the jaws of ruin , and codille .
' till you achieve that female - male ,
so is it preordained , that he behold
that he is one of the best .
follow me then , all ye little pigs ,
but lost , for ever lost , to me these joys ,
upon rienzi 's night ,
canto xix . fourth ledge : the slothful.--dante dreams of the
so , out over mountain - moors , and mosses brown ,
and forth she went , and made a vanishing ,
( lo , where arise three peerless stars ,
a little volume , torn and thumbled ,
when one vast cultivated region teems
their filthy traces on the half - gorged prey .
who played with hearts as nothing human ,
there as here ! "
fair ship of the phaeacians , as she came home from a convoy
i never thocht to thole the waes , vol . iv . , 221 .
to see their shepherd the poor shepherds press ;
this firstly ; for if fate indeed shaped sinon for all bale
with eyes that looked afar
the snow is summer 's canopy ,
and feel , what emigrants had felt before ,
the birds still paired , and had their separate nest ,
let go the cross !   oh , you who cling to sorrow ,
they would have snapped asunder withes and bands .
from him round whose colossal strength the tendrils
labienus ; and , as described in book iii . , was sent to
" hermes obeys ; with golden pinions binds
to struggle onward through the fight of life !
preserved their line , and equal kept the war .
dream not i tempt you to forswear
she ance was ca'd a bonnie lass--
your treasure box , and find a hoard of just such things
across the sea ; none of thy folk i fear :
and many a lonely hour we 've spent ,
your eyes -- your eyes are witchery !
immediately begin to ebb , and so continue till the channels
and in its turgid crimson track
my prayer , some daily good to do
a sound is heard among the forest - tops ;
and i came to the brook i mentioned ,
wherein more numerous the people dwelt ,
some say ' tis haunted,-but
and rudely rends thy robes ;
in urns , and altars round
but step thou in , and share the food
so , peter left us,--in distress .
all purposes unsure ,
diffidence . dryden , in his epistle to roscommon , says ,
can your dear eyes forget , or must i stand
your looks are all the candles that i need .
that notable shall his achievements be .
does darkness give god better light
our hero , seeing molly pass ,
it was a ' for our rightfu ' king
tried
his dainties , and the world 's more numerous half
and purple of thine heart , unstained , untold ,
being perfect , it shall triumph . let them slumber :
two alone survive the rest ,
glass smashed ;
it is not from beauty ,
but the red cock crew too early ,
and ca ' the merry mills
from level to upland , from upland to crest ,
with robin , saving carriers , posts and folk
( and it was n't the least what the lady meant ) ,
in which are thousands of many - hued women ,
at the magic of his singing ,
the gold out of his hond anon ,
as orpheus ' lyre the brutes compelled ,
your baby - days flow’d in a much - troubled channel ;
were , if he abroad should die ,
fell upon us at the peak
" not for his faith the red - haired christian dies .
aneas then look'd where leftward , under a mountain ,
and sick of crimson seas .
the binders crashed as hounds went over ,
soupyll and plyant , apt to correccion
and the stone with stone knit firmly ,
i d pring de tears to breitmann 's eyes ,
from underneath an aged oak ,
so let the gate swing open
duty , and she may see her way to coming .
and round thee , pallas , throng , and aid thee in the fight .
hurried words of love , that seemed a part of the music .
in need he was fed , and now he is fled
pure as angel thoughts thy dreams !
es laut empor.--so kling ' in sangesbraus
light on my spirit , give from wing and thigh
the pines , and the valley below ,
when did music come this way ?
their fathers ' names were mr . black ,
they have enough as ' tis : i see
they wept abundant , and they wept aloud .
in changeless baby loveliness still there .
ni char dofydd diobeith . ”   ( myv . arch . i. 175 . )
will see them here for battle boune . "
nor quality , nor reputation ,
now with the laurel bough from helicon
for he hath sent unto our king ,
" one shilling , " " no change given , " " ticket - holders only " ;
some cheerful chance will right the apple - cart ,
calls the red tempest round the guilty head ,
blind as the eyes of pearl in buddha 's brow
the dinner 's getting cold ;
what means this metal in windy belfries hung
and can i die now that thou biddest live ?
by smearing treacle on it :
and the good master said : " this circle scourges
did ever mortal pass a sinless day ?
to be benev'lently druv back to a contented master ,
not alone by the might of your muscles
_ tenant l'_enfant _ sur tes genoux ; _
turn away these fell diseases
she 'll stand to it tightly ,
and his frightful death .      the forces of darkness
next morn by times , to johnny 's great surprize ,
nor the one the other injure ,
saw how he turned his wistful eye
( fearing some foe ) he seizes on the bones
or a day 's endless grieving for the dance
teach me half the gladness
that he his spouse beholding with a babe
what rivals for her favours wait !
my thoughts , far in advance in indian file ,
craving no empire , intrigue ever spurning ,
for bonnie little flory .
to you , mi fader , that ben hiere
his armour shining bright .
“ he fertile from his wounds , his hundred heads
wherein thou walkest through thy large demesne
seven times three.--love
and reconciles man to his lot .
hers are the willing chains o ' love ,
bowing huge , round backs ;
love 's dearest joys they never prove ,
never weather - beaten sail more willing bent to shore ,
this faunus , which his stelthe caste ,
grew a savage wolf of hisi .
surprisal , unadmonisht , unforewarnd .
what man did his own goodness e'er advance
bot for he wolde be nomore
those writers could have produced , and which our greatest poets
women [ and ] wives were restored to joy . far and wide
but , mother mine ! when i am dead--
( vich vas all his hartful plan ) ,
beyond our sight might never flee ,
with him where his bloody bed is thou wilt find eight men :
" blow your pipe there till you burst ! "
some lyric , breaking like the sea ,
they are so fine and fair ,
are truer yet than men !
" yes , and , " bob would say , " such a serviceable
when a hero goes a - wooing
while you are rusting here at home . "
mine from thy heart , make thy nearness seem afar ?
( fool that he was . ) and let them safely go ,
the man 's rejected nature ,
no more shalt thou by oracling abuse
and know thyself a fool ,
an ' here come trip a - waller'n ' roun '
is tenanted by man ! the rest a waste ,
the pleasant streets of that dear old town ,
blow , blow !
thei token the possessioun
while drooping blossoms withered in the light .
( where , when the favour'd of thy choice ,
a joy caught in the childhood days of pleasantness ,
and closely caressing
on new - mown grass , and earth , and fragrant flowers ;
i spurn'd him from my side ,
we watched the satyrs chase the dryades ;
the sea 's rough field shall plough ;
the fever and the struggle of the day
and kiss the face thou dost deride .
from concent divinely framed :
which her hopes had upborne ,
faithfully giving my aid their house and estates in directing ,
and over them triumphant death his dart
and a duke and his duchess near ;
what matter that the knowers scoffing say ,
this precious work of liberty ,
so spake telemachus , and in answer to his prayer did zeus ,
what can thy sister more to save thy life ?
above the folded hills they shall survey
thy fond result inspir'd , that wing'd him there ,
the pang is past,--and now with blest endeavour
‘ anone thou tell me . ’
crushing retort . ]
and no belief hath yet that i am he .
i heard their promise who divine
how like the world these flowery leas
the kings sit down to dinner , and the queens stand up to dance .
storms only , brought my youthful morning red ,
but i shall ne'er forget the dress she wore ,
the walking walls of rome .
while in the circle , stunned , a great will stands .
before the sons of baal ,
but when the morning broke on her , behold , a dozen ships ,
ukko hid it in the cloud - space ,
frail shoulders bent to bear
from now i leave off all petty decorations .   lord of my heart , no
finds no rest for her feet ,
adown the stream , without or oar or sail ,
she faintly smiled , and said she had been reading
this know i too :   might mortal breath
then we 'd hear that voice o ' his--
were less than mole - hills , and such gaunt ravines
if tha be ta’en .
and pandarus gan holde his tunge stille ,
and anything you wish for will come true
in fairyland ; or , aiblins , wi ' you pay
( its source i ca n't unearth )
an ' sigh , an ' sab , an ' greet her lane ,
with which thine ethics thoroughly discusses
all quarters else with falchion or with lance ,
which makes him -- clean back of the power
" here will i bring my sorrow and my longing , "
while my tacky slicker dripped ,
of christians like a rotten limb , proclaimed
in the rustle of the breeze .
and if the girl spake more , i heard not her ,
we both may issue hence , without constraint
until cold lethe anoints , captures your foot in its flight .
_ hor . _ which it is like to , dog !
only come yourself to watch me ,
and distant vancouver rally ,
once i seem'd the lord to be
no guarded watch , in peace he sleeps ;
at nottingham when we were ,
and speed the parting guest !
i saw as brain - blurred drunkards see ;
with a scorn in her eye which the gazer could feel ,
and whether , snatched by death , it die with us ,
accused of blasphemy of god , he stood
in private mourn'd his loss , and left the court .
then unto god thy spirit 's sorrows pour ,
be she meeker , kinder , than
the people said , a weed .
playing at ninepins with the crown .
said , ' let a ' your mourning be ;
make him a plume like a turkey - wing duster,--
monuments at thermopylae , he uses the words { gramma } and
your sweet secureness for congenial fears ,
slew his own guest , the godlike iphitus .
and keep thy willie on the anxious seat
and oh , the hurt of it went deep !
consentest , i to these will lead thy steps :
he answered , and a heavy sigh from inmost heart did reach :
and cosae 's town , a hundred , tried and brave ;
said the calf ; " and i thought that was right . "
smell drenched by the way which reaches
like lofty and powerful capitals .
but twa - three winters will inform ye better .
and enchanted the city of tyre .
for either the achæans lurk within this fashioned tree ,
to the earth her sons were made of !   o fair face
might bring down , when not anxious love could save ,
so mot i nedes taken hiede
of god , and thy white body sleeps
sands in the moon before those builders were .
there are so many things he loved and treasured
if thou goest to the feasting ,
nor at our _ shinties _ scoff , boys ,
that counsels is but heard impatiently ,
the long lost lights of love i know ,
so jenny inherited my fortune and married willard--
whence water came , at thy command ,
the reverend nestor and his queen reposed .
pale on the crimsoned snow , without a home ,
the vain wisdom of peace .
they say his horse saw standing in the way
his water must from jordan streams be brought ,
all in the early morning , a goodly company ;
“ they are not many , certainly . ”
upon the moon i fixed my eye ,
gay health , and lusty labour , rose ;
the seemul , gorgeous as a bride ,
happier days may yet be mine ,
so , if a tear , when thou art dying ,
how even the flowers and grasses know him ,
she gives , to cheer the sailors ' drooping souls .
to square the ledger in some thortful hour ,
hinc tibi rara quies animoque exclusa uoluptas ,
when winter comes
and to - morrow he shall see it ;
requires sorest need .
thou hast more power for good than zeus for ill ,
like fearon , ashe , and others we could mention ;
alas ! what answer shall i frame ,
him winged words :
taking my part in the drunken carousals
my voice shall fill a narrower ring .
down unto mary , when the son of god
but simply said , " with pleasure . "
so the day grows ever lighter ,
but as the giants were strong and great ,
" i will not guess . farewell , beloved friend !
bold lucagus and liger , brethren twain .
we broke through the lane we had open'd before ,
to mrs . ---- , on her beautiful translation of voiture 's kiss .
that they may have thir wish , to trie with mee
or , votaress to the virgin sanctitude
to eat a _ very little _ piece ,
snails slime the untrodden threshold - stone ;
forth into the bush of sunset
who there , as lord high - constable obeyed ,
time - hallowed mementos
arose and left the wingless earth
once , these were _ all _ mine : the least , poor one was heaven :
between the flax and osiers ,
has love at length diminished
in the night - time , stealing westward--
that i 'd sit ' eedless , starin ' at a card
" the phrensy of this madman to subdue . "
and spend my bright half - crown .
and the unborn that should see thee a queen .
hands with yearning unto the tree , and pluck the apples growing
or else swift death : now wiser grown in years ,
in light , to judge the quick and dead ,
and puts away his flies .
they that thrive well take counsel of their friends .
vague foam on islands of alcina .
that little jackdaw kept hopping about ;
do n't tell all you know ,
corse - like , she lays extended on the grass .
with charms inconstant shine ;
so arise and face me .
yonder out of sight they crossed ,
even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
our serving - men , who honours and reveres
her father took another mate ;
as they all walk'd up to the altar rails ,
padre c.   good day , and god be with you !   pray , what is it ?
while preaching godly sermons ;
ingrate , dreams of a sky brighter , serener than his .
between the torments and the city wall ,
delights the hearts that are with love acquainted ,
these have saved from himself , for the truth they reveal
to the great tree the leaflets clung ,
so hollow is the depth , that from no part ,
shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love ?
i lay last night and knew not why i was sad .
and what to - night your wisdom shall approve
to think he 'll get a horse like that !
times , has not been mentioned : it is believed he was of the west
sent me out to be a merchant .
the ships with the armour that the god had given her . she found
we plant with the apple tree .
but what no jury of mayfair could doubt
_ nem _ : _ con : _ to the chair , and the meeting dissolved .
to hit him just a clip , like , nothing more .
sail , and see home again , and see the shropshire men ,
insurers can claim ( if you 'll only reflect )
a cap - tive now
fly - snouts and gnats'-noses , peace !
they askt . odysseus said , " he 'll go inside .
became an easy prey .
for i cam nevere yit in stede ,
now by my mother ceres ' soul , i swear
is horrifying in the light ,
so much the dearer is my widow priz'd ,
the upland hamlets will invite ,
the charms that fix the roving heart of youth ? "
his mates their safety to the waves consign ;
_ a_lasse ! i erre , thou art no childe to me ,
what could true passion , what could walter say ?
in the cave of the shelving hill ;
and much may still exist
gladness i leave and all delight for aye ,
that makes us feel at length resign'd
the very shadow of her robe alone!--
of him and his arms i 'll be the in - grave - r.
the briars turned to roses , roses ;
“ as ruling prince thy care be shown
he hears not my voice when i cry ;
i tell you i am what i was and more .
miscuit argenti lethalia pondera vivi ,
( a sweet , child - look -- it witched him well ! )
in a letter written sometime after she died , he said , strangely
she spake : " is he thy master / and thou his vassal art ,
with a mind self - overaw'd ,
and down the skies white clouds are furled .
is gendered by the interposed brass ,
through which aurora shows her brightening face :
ribs like those ?   who else !   they glared
him whose home is in the forest ,
he said , and cov'ring with his radiant arms
and well the singing thrush and lily know ,
if now and then i sigh " mine own ! "
that spreads her verdant leaf to the morning ray .
that naught but death should bar return ,
to the rhyming and the chiming of the bells !
and maybe for months and for years ;
i bid thee take the thing while fresh in mind ,
with the food that celebrities eat at their meals
that i thy purpose did not know ,
then thus the mighty ruler of the main :
as if alive .   will't please you rise ?   we 'll meet
the telltale blood in artery and vein
they brought forth to the light of day
and hears the unexpressive nuptiall song ,
earnest . if jove had let us we should have put a stop to his
that the dead are not evermore dead :
but the bowls be changed to wampum ,
may haue all thyng whatsoeuer he woulde
hence , hence , ye clowns , th ' usurper thus commands ,
hapless youth in purple vestments ,
a new jerusalem , sent down from heaven .
learn what thou wishest .   guinicelli i ,
into hollow laughter pass !
martis equis acheronta fugit ,
which was the name of arthur ’s shield ; —
i dare attempt , assist my daring song .
go and sole your feet like horse 's ,
one glimpse of heaven 's light
and momently fraying the while
how she best might meet the
your friends , then ?
i keep thee with a power i seemed to lose
strong the ghiblee wind is blowing ,
amid the sweets of breathing flowers ?
and spreads for aid his unavailing hands .
she 'll send it back again to me .
the sightless shades of death him wrapp'd around .
misty soul or flaming heart ,
peace itself would mean nothing but for the strife that preceded ;
nor did i make the whisky wait
till my last pulse ticks
to fully turn it , then went in the room ;
" he thundered on the stranger 's mug ,
celibacy of the clergy , which was enforced for so long a period .
and went his way with elenor murray 's case .
to face the men and long - rob'd dames of troy ,
and the hands that destroy
the circles of his eyen in his head
mother and home , i greet thee ! o caress thy child
these frightful noises to allay
but if they do , the more to flow ,
drive thy herd across the lowlands ,
one that should drop his beads for thee .
youth 's glory shining in their eyes .
and al this thing right seen it with your ye ,
clover , catchfly , adder's - tongue
come our lovely lady nigh ;
he who shepherded his sheep
in senses , which inherit earth , and heavens ;
only night because thou art
if he can find a chaire or stoole , he 's layd .
and sleep is a champagne - colored coverlet ,
the hardy normans all he overthrew ;
she sat beside him in the wood -
and all my joys are vanisht quite , -
though falls the sky
when tired with vain rotations of the day ,
with comfortable words .   from that dark grave
to pomps , that are but impotent delight ,
which will not let me go ,
has bin writ be every poet
and waited for my answer . all in vain
each several feature of the place :
to give employment to the artisan .
" no , ike , " says doc , " this world hain't saw
what premiers ? what ev'n monarchs ? mighty gaugers !
on my study shelves they stand ,
had i such welcome for a river
their answers had .
till all my companions sink under the table ;
and deep as words can follow feeling .
their faces ever westward bent
but if thy inclinations that way tend ,
the vánar legions filled the plain ,
que sollozo postrado en la inacción !
report or lamentation .
as i do rightly understand .
mister brown , i 'm amazed
where wildly huddled to the eye ,
who with small belief encumbered
the man had killed the thing he loved ,
and i a pauper go ;
but she , insensible of that ,
how fast the scenes come flocking to
and what must please thee more -- for thy own reign .
the brush and stones unheeded ,
white as the silver feathers of a dove ,
yet say ( for the immortals all things know )
thrice thirty times , with star - bound brow , dim night
the lord of irony,--that master - spell ,
and the softly tinted cheek ,
and dolores ' face
ah me ! why may not love and life be one ?
from haunting gnat and goblin bee ,
and ' till thy image comes , unceasing weep .
with a ' good - morning ' smiled , not said .
¿ quién calmará ¡ oh españa ! tus pesares ?
you 're not a second arcas .
tom dansey was a famous whip
" here are within two spotless [ maidens ] , my daughters :
may well recur a pang for what is lost ,
some on the stony star - fish ride ,
dans son palais de chaume ,
some burning noon go dry !
all night i lie awake and mark
but now she 's floating down the nith ,
sharp was his voice ; which in the shrillest tone ,
of the down - looking sun .   thereto
only smelts , and worthless swimmers ,
its balmy point aloof , when thus my guide :
broad gems flash out and crowns illume
domestics , by ulysses gained for me .
or i fear you never will learn at all . "
storm - stained ravines , and crags that lawns inlay ,
and in their rage such signs of rage they bear ,
in her,--whose lips i may not kiss,--
himself always on the city side . as a man in a dream who fails to
and they tell the tale of his charity
and thus transformed each beauteous view ,
to comfort his sad heart .
breast of his shoulders ! because he wished to see too far before
the nameless lassie ,
become as ' club - footed ' as some one suggested !
and they hear once more ,
to say her prayers , douce , honest woman !
how oft we mourn in fortune 's sunlit vale
an emblem the reality shines through .
sprang first from human eyes .
found the court - rooms filled with singers ,
in - to the derke chaumbre , as stille as stoon ,
and walked in paradise .
moon , that now meetst the orient sun , now fli'st
but yet was very shy ;
perish'd , or ever he had here arrived ,
the indian long slighted an offer so fair ,
the springs and autumns pass ,
it softened torment , in the funeral hues
whose hounds are science , high desires the steeds ,
and dying rise , and rising with him raise
spreads in a twinkle
and over all my being falls
it is good when it happens , " say the children ,
yet , was the deed so meekly done,--
at heaven 's gate how he will , and for as long
but i , urged blindly on by hate ,
and there beneath their shadow , blood
then they broke up the wheel , and in their flight
song , that as much our muses doth excel ,
or trembling heart , like leaf which flutters still ,
rolling down the ratcliffe road drunk and raising cain :
again her drooping plume is drest ,
only herrick 's left alone
" hast recht , mein lieber sohn ;
hot nick had lain cold
to any happy flower ,
i passed by his garden , and saw the wild brier
look out in fright and see the two go by ,
to death 's loud call,--to nature 's stern decree !
the bond of love and peace between you both ;
seen through the window of the memory ,
to wake its slumbering angel in !
did allah amid chaos fix this light
and of men a countless number ,
by impact of a star ? let loose a sulphurous wind ?
in these cold and lifeless waters ,
for he was so awful ragged , and in parts so awful bare ,
to fill the armada 's maw .
that doth unfold it , and this during still
left them in a mighty hurry ,
the tapestries of paradise
gave a proof of the solidity of his judgment and the power of his
the fight is fix'd ; nor shall the branded name
i can not help you as i wish to do
' tis a motion of dawn , like a flicker of shade on shade .
and the ocean rose to view .
the six of whom i spoke some pages back ,
lift , lift the eye to heaven ,
are now going into the house of hades under the secret places of
a freshness as pure as the twilight of dawn .
the multitudinous little snow - flakes sped .
both good and bad , both quick and dead ,
now his bright armes assaying , now his speare ,
stalks careless on , with unregarding pride ;
beyond the southern zone .
to linger out a purposed overthrow .
virtue and vice had boundaries in old time
year after year , not altering by one point ,
proud daphne , scorning phrebus lovely * * fyre ,
zerbino was more wonders seen to do
o , fresh is the rose in the gay , dewy morning ,
“ whom you remember , bones and ashes rest .
a company , with whom i may not sort ,
any face should so strongly remind me of her !
that live , we dead . i would think of a thousand things ,
and cheerful turned to work anew .
girded with my belt of copper ,
moments , years , or ages passed , when , lifting
amid the jest and laughter ,
on which was stretched the lifeless knight in view ,
bloated - bellied , through the bushes ?
the sheperd - swain , who to allay the heat ,
from the maid of orleans , prologue , scene 4 .
toward the princes wel i finde ;
in still approaching circles , still remote ,
that i fancied the river as winding around ,
and see what the baby will say .
i thus remind thee now , that thou mayst cease
the fourth , and bravest of them all , the first :
beneath the victor 's arch .
he bleez'd owre her , an ' she owre him ,
a single moonbeam through the hollow creeps :
" plays round the head , but comes not to the heart . "
gilt with the summer 's burnished gleam ,
that ' twixt the meadows and the suburbs lie ,
it crawls in the corners , hiding from the light ,
all the heroes of wainola
( where nature gives the woes of man to cease , )
" his victim was my own loved youth!--
with sanctifying sweetness , did precede .
in one self - sweet - conspiring sympathy :
mute did the minstrels stand
pillars of ever living light ,
wild shrieks and wrathful curses , groans and prayers ,
though richest hues the peacock 's plumes adorn ,
will compel thee to beg , and begging to tremble in every vein .
young _ sahib _ with the yellow hair --
behold now , is life not good ?
unripen'd for conversion : back once more
hides yet unsung . what hope for me to find ,
one shoe off , the other shoe on ,
alas ! prince agib went and asked them in ;
one helpless innocent , learchus nam'd ,
on me , like the rain in autumn
thou maysn find those will love thee dear ,
and no more as the thing beforetime seen .
and would make thy purpose thine .
shall sing thee songs with mixed and mighty steven .
tossed aside her gleaming golden locks--
and one sits sullenly
and one thing after another
there 's such good mutton cutlets , and strong curaçoa ,
dropped by memory .
do spirits converted need .   this mount inflicts
i recall her , and that far scene ,
and gird with fancy 's fairest flowers blown .
lungeth , plungeth he !
lo ! as young una thrall'd the forest - king ,
sufis , you say , must not take this or that ,
i waited the inevitable last .
what have i done , and what do i fear ,
no , no , ye stars ! there is no death with you ,
a rogue of canzonets and serenades .
the mount is mute , the channel dry ,
track
one moment let us drink the blue
what a woman is like , who can say ?
come with me , i 'll show you where i caught them
hail to thee , benignant ukko ,
besides , he hated bleeding :
but say if him i here behold , who forth
and seemed from his expression to detect
with joy in his heart to the market has gone .
comes close vp with him , and puts on as fast ,
if i among the poeple duelle ,
beneath the savage storms of time--
and revel in their glittering gold .
but the oriole , the oriole ,
and the wind resonance--
“ œneus enjoy his proud victorious son ,
or if her worth she rightly knew ,
who thrice my brow durst sign ,
of land or kingship ; and withal he dreamed
till christ at the end relieve our guard .
heau'n will not , and she can not stay .
the same apostle too has elsewhere owned ,
the one , like a nabob , in habit most splendid ,
" the man is no fool , " answered penelope , " it would very likely
nor hear the voice i love , nor read again
for fear the moon should shine alone ,
an admirable sunday - school book—_arkansas evangel . _
sir plume , of amber snuff - box justly vain ,
and no one mischief greater than your frown
i have endured and done in days before ;
reft from their jaws by somnus ' sleepy rout ,
al lys in him to dyȝt & deme . _
" cursed be cannan . " after prayer , the meeting
with heavy heart and tearful eye ,
saying : ' in god 's house ran he weapon through
trim as thy garden , ample as thy farm ,
and is still the rhineland 's patron .
no second misery prompts the sigh .
through the infinite host , nor less for that
as i pass to the beach , art stirred ?
it moveth not , but is by me controlled ,
of heavy trials made in life 's champaign ;
it 's quite the thing to " travel " nowadays
' climb up for your life by the footholes .
and we saw that his face grew sad and wan :
the one day of summer in all the year ,
for thou , to northern lands , again
leave the sick hearts that honour could not move ,
and hum these lines of his:--
que será sienpre ensalçado :
and have no words with fair amanuenses .
who said : two vast and trunkless legs of stone
wi ' diamond rings they were cover'd a ' .
in vain , alas ! in vain , ye gallant few !
there , ' neath a heaven diseased , it lies ,
of guile , of hate , of envie , of revenge ;
how the doughty hagen / did many a helmet cleave ,
thy raiments and thy ebony cross affright me !
too late for striving fingers
chariot , the one with a blow from a thrown spear , while the other
and pines away .   i spake to thy disciples
o , never say that i was false of heart
then odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely on her , and
with dew at the dawn , the pearls have slipped--
you both had lived for your own joys alone .
in whatsoever is alleged against you .
for though from out our bourne of time and place
and justice are -- and still what he
their terrors harmless , tho ' their story heard ,
he might not be a singer without fault ,
claimed and clothed in joy 's own word :
and drainings of the lea ,
discat et egregio sudet in eloquio ,
the regal heart that comes at last
by every lucky charm ,
what do i gaze on ? nothing -- look again !
forty gone down together
" and yet you think you like it , dear ? "
when for thee i forged the sampo ,
my silver planet , both of eve and morn !
the keenness of their satire , and their shrewd observation of the
seizes the soul with ravishment more sweet
nam neque pyramidum sumptus ad sidera ducti ,
all year long the timid maple has been dressed in prim and sober
followed liden close behind .
which we to others , from ourselves ,
for roused to vengeance by repeated wrong ,
the king the chine , the honour of the feast ,
with martial rage he sought idomeneus .
and after many thousand wintry years ,
but his ideas of sport are crude ;
to cattle , sharply pealed ,
i hear the trumpet of alectryon
yea , do whatso thou wilt with all things here ,
when knights went forth through storm and stress
hangs dense and gray at the close of day--
across her low bed , in the churchyard ,
to every leafy bough above
so saying , he number'd carefully the gold ,
themis , offended , sent forth a wild beast to ravage the flocks
into the middle of the plank ;
she lifted it with eager hands
an awful funny one i sorta caught--
expressing grief .
lies prisoned , and then breathe on me ,
and make her my soul 's bride :
as two thousand years before now;--
that prophesy to him of victory sure ?
they write of bergamot
the trembling apples smote the dewless grass ,
of all thy list of lovers finely drest ,
his midnight search , where soonest he might finde
and future times shall own your struggles blest ,
its willing numbers ; not in vain hath flow'd
and are we the aunts and uncles ? "
or kneeling virgins weep around his tomb .
pours fierce ambition in a caesar 's mind ,
is haunted by the hum of bees .
to breathless nature 's dark abyss ;
of a mouse in his life !
thy ways of warfare ?   by what scythian rite
" do you like ours ' n ' father 's new book , bay ? "
no lofty pile nor sculptured bust
vowed to the infinite . he who thus vows
in - to the gardin from the chaumbre doun .
nor can he be at rest
though he repeated oft the tale ? no tongue
under the shade of hush'd dodonian boughs ,
and if such cognizance thou didst not show ,
i hope a few months will quite alter the case ,
crosses it issues with better course and conjoined with a better
the bearers of the torch who could not see
sends twenty more , and our own island adds ,
and the lions of gold above richard the bold
' talleyrand and me had n't met for a long time except at _ emigre _
magnolia petals that float on a white - starred pool . . .
is pliant and expansive ; for each limb
  ( the accent is on the last syllable . )
says , ` here , you lady , if you 'll sell , i 'll buy :
fill the cup , and sheath the sword ,
although i saw it all in the mind 's eye
to sleep and quiet , to my room there crept
she takes some kind of cough stuff in a spoon ,
scarcely can hope to attain upon earth to an actual abstract ,
“ with a huge stone . i singly him oppos'd ,
the red leaves fall upon the mould ,
with cold despair allay the fever ,
the long procession , and the gorgeous pomp
but choose , each in the barren wood ,
a little water singing as little waters do .
not how to answer them .   i say , ' indeed , i can not tell . '   they
fortunæ geminam sæpe jaci pilam .
his friend , disconsolate ; the other greeks
my fireman was beside me : " your nerve is going , jack ;
aeuro ~ who made the so bold here to dweaesaes ,
this dreary , restless river ;
" forbid it , jove ! and all the gods ! ( he cried ) ,
opes to the rich at as easy a rate
cast a star therein to drown ,
and armed hosts , an unexpected force ,
give to my lover my silent lute . "
facts or to reshape them to its needs .
chariot for their brother , were turned into poplars .
for they will right and law maintain
but it will find him out ; nor run from it ,
upon this hill which well - nigh kissed the skies ,
and underneath thy cooling shade ,
te conuiuia , te forum sonabit ,
nothing could be more gentle -- or more royal ;
big tears from mules and camels flow
of double edge , and with a dreadful cry
while a young girl tugged at a trace
had beene puft out , and from their stations hurl'd :
e'en those who faint for shame within his sight .
and after lost me honest men 's respect ;
takes leaven of hope .   i caught ,
  _ the diary of john evelyn _ , ed . e. s. de beer , 6 vols . ( oxford ,
the cloud of sorrow , dark as plutonian night ,
to give foreknowledge true , and certain doom .
drew near to me and offered me his shoulder .
for delvers , ditchers , an ' sic cattle ;
there in captivitie he lets them dwell
that beams of sunshine filter through .
what though ye hae nor kith nor kin ' ,
upon a new peninsula , --
there will be fighting ? oh , i am selfish , mother ;
and the other one had not .
cilley fell at graves 's first fire ,
when god appears in majesty , and power ,
nor would she bring you up a brood
spread his wings and sank to earth ;
quid tibi vana suos offert mea bulla tumores ?
an obscure mourner that would weep alone .
and did you see the waving flags ,
throughout my domain .
that was but earth even from its birth ,
and of course you 've spent
over heath and bent .
sit doun amang my ain dissenters .
when she came back
thou too , hoar mount ! with thy sky - pointing peaks ,
for us the snows of athos
what lean translations out of french !
then on the sacred altars pouring wine ,
o son of peleus ! lo , thy gods appear !
about the others . "
for flames i saw , and wailings smote mine ear :
" she went away ,
to make you happier , the fault is yours ,
his anger therefore ; so shall he with smiles
to hear thy silver bell
carry the day with the divil 's audacity ;
and follow bold a man exil’d ?
all hues of beauty mingle .   so i brought
and , by my trouthe , or it be dayes two ,
with all our going through this golden weather ,
false friend or true ?
forgive me , lord , but i am sick with grief ,
repels it ; and , perhaps , chemical affinities , and gravitation
our mourning fancies wild ,
within the last line of each stanza .
our comfort doth on time depend ,
learn from the beasts the physic of the field ;
where do the wandering tribes resort ,
against the blue miraculous skies ,
wainamoinen 's knee and ankle ,
and the sentinel stars set their watch in the sky ;
all - beauteous , from her late disgrace ;
then will your mind be so well braced ,
my heart , that bitter first emotion ;
it 's too much lak missus ' shoe .
who want to be , but ca n't ! for they must know
subdue , or dare not to return ;
your images hover,--and here we are
or when the day is born ,
but to show thee how , in part ,
of bells and pomegranates and furbelows ,
wilt thou disdain mine offering ?
all now labor together , and firmly decided already
which neptune obey ,
for envie that his brothers offering found
i am a fole and glad am of that name
and we missed it , lost it forever .
there was none that could fathom his hid design .
shaped like a bull , a monster bore
all the virgins vied in cooking ;
in feign'd pursuit of hare or bounding roe ,
he 'd given many a man a lathering
" that , to the eye of man , our justice seems
to all thy friends and retinue .
made rich th ' adiacent lands with odorous smell ,
hang from the bushy rock ; my songs are sung ;
an ' de tucky he charve ;
' tis surely a punch - and - judy man ,
to breathing dusk and arrowy moonlight vowed ,
and at the first slow notes my panpipes gave
hasten through these floods enchanted ,
while he lives within the body ,
i wish that thou give such a blast ,
along the cliff to fall and pause and fall did seem .
that oft - times , when the cure 's completed ,
is matter , must with matter likewise fall .
gert the count to randers rode ,
but for his visage piteous . "
and you gasp and reel and shudder
but i and the bees and the birds -- we doubt it ,
each stakes his claim and gives his reason why ;
her voice rings out a message sweet ,
with its own futile force .
prompted my soul to industry ;
the gates of memory unbar :
of ida faced a chill wind from the west .
than an old hedge to goody blake ?
te mente pura et simplici ,
are there oft dull and dreary as a dun--
thoughts apt to neighbour thine , thou creature sunlit ?
full on the central column caesar 's host ,
rove where thou wilt , awaits thee still thy throne !
king of agrigentum ; psaumis of camarina is celebrated in the 4th
abiding , let thy wrath against the greeks
as , with dejected steps , he passes
--come hither in thy hour of strength ,
apollo then bestrode a golden cloud ,
a mother 's place ; had nursed the ill
thrush and blue - bird came north together .
their error how sweet and their raptures how _ venial _ ,
' twere to explain
from pacing , pacing without hope or quest
albeit thou must confess each verse , each word
should be that eastern star for guidance lent ,
and a cot that o'erlooks the wide sea ;
bidding , and stood on the outer threshold and saw them all
and bretagne 's pride ; all virtues ever yet
remember because of his sins .   yet could not daniel bring him to
the boys will come and take them every day ,
and hear upon the wind , now loud , now low ,
the dauntless timeless dream i dreamed ,
so when we ’d geen him what we cud ,
way , loaded with your noble gifts , i should obey you gladly and
who can cover his body with any garment whatsoever ,
and could engage in trifling mirth ,
processive harmony ,
silk housings swept the ground ,
for even the heastern counties ' trains must come in at last .
and long had pondered where were best to dwell
it stands alone and somberly
" death to kwasind ! " was the sudden
yet absent ; but not absent from their love .
there is a softness in the night
the heart of emanuel jones ? "
the old man spoke reproachful ; at his words
winona heard the news with false surprise ,
low - lidded twilight , o'er the valley 's brim ,
hushing every muttered murmur , 110 .
whose tears a desert fount reveal !
to fit the heavenly mansions and the light of day ?
anne :           would they were basilisks , to strike
hrethel 's offspring , when home he came ,
and his fightin ' good as his farmin ' bad--
and wilt thou now confer our long - earn'd due ,
of the bee 's best vintage .
from off the tossing of these fiery waves ,
qui vult esse pius . virtus et summa potestas
their sister silvia cherish'd with her care
and scatter'd my collected mind abroad .
or frown whilst waiting for their change .
" pretty doings are here , sir ( he angrily cries ,
then i must use my house - right.--steady !
it is forsoth a maner femynyne
and kirtle gave him , tatter'd , both , and foul ,
to those we 've left behind us !
that aged man who had worked for grant
she twined one blood - red , with her love in each strand :
their relentless past .
no defect , nor no complaint ;
and let marko tell the deeds of marko —
of covoitise thou schalt knowe
well , good - bye , my good owd beauty--
the king whose might all earth confessed ,
since body of earth and water , air 's light breath ,
it gains the rock ; the rower 's hand
yet joys like ours can ne'er be told--
thy heritage , thou eye among the blind ,
the devil will have you the whole of the week .
cling to him--
from tankards scooped in pearl ;
seek refuge far , when help is vain
to anything .   the moon in a broad swath
behind me close i heard a step ,
and are not any more .
beyond expressing ,
no man can tell us the way he died ,
shy roses , fragrant - smelling .
each its separate song recorded .
nothing but the fatal wawbeek ? "
as it run down : and s'prised
filled the air ,
her full time having come , the lady went
awd foaks were thar , fra near an ' far ,
those seven years of youth ; we are frantic then .
i hearkened to him : blithely didst thou cling
though naught were left him but the hilts of gold ,
look therefore of the cross : he , whom i name ,
pondered kisses , o hear !
the sun and the sky and the cloudlet gray ;
miew , miew , miew , miew .
nothing so great , but she may bear her part .
and he answered that woman , " yes . "
yet in what mind soever / did each and every stand ,
upon my mournful eyelids and my brow
of lightning squirmed about her needles .   " oh ! "
then eumaeus said , " you have perceived aright , as indeed you
that his merrie men might not see .
“ stray'd here , and thither ; others swam and rear'd
but in my time a father 's word was law ,
as the pilot calls , " stand by for stays ! "
tantum habuit baptista loqui , tot flumina rerum ,
as this pretty girl declares . "
you will ever be losing some relishing bite
your poor old dad is simply wild
sometimes o'errateth , i as oft despise ;
then in a steaming stench of sulphur died .
skillful surgeons by profession ,
each candidate
to face the word that 's fit
to sit in that honoured station .
with pity , and with terror , tear my heart ;
they said , " her tears will fall like autumn rain . "
more servants wait on man
dashed with sun and splashed with tears ,
from you to me , by reason of my sin,--
think fit to live in perfect chastity ;
and the wain of donizetti and tapischowe are aw !
where it half buried lies , with murderous blow :
“ oppose such might , that midmost sky resounds
receives thee dead , though gygae boast thy birth ;
man - slaughter , shall be held the highest pitch
which ne'er was turned by plow up to the sun--
in a certain gorgeous chamber ,
on satan erst with starlike scorn !
great was the day : the meanest sword that fought
of the hapless outcast      is hateful to men .
or while i love the sympathetic maid ,
her tongue itself forgot its use,--
there he most sweetly sung the prophecie
thou must with love his will obey :
that god , thy steps may lead in ways aright ,
" the worldly hope men set their hearts upon
soothe them and guide them
yet like a craven slight the trumpet call
shee askes , if sad , or saving powers ,
kisses are warm on her hands .
as ye disown yon paughty dog
of dazzling glory , and in wrath shot round
and hailed thee , not perchance without a tear .
sang so much about mine anguish ?
all needless stuff , all sapwood , hardens them ,
and the sigh that heaves a bosom sae fair !
for labors done ;
its long delay , feels every welcome stroke
religion . " sloth " supplies us with " philosophy , " or the apathetic
vict .          a little bird in the air
all joys save those that can not pall ,
and he far dreaded in the moorish war ,
then rest when weary on a bank , where not a grassy blade
which sanctifies " i will " and " i refuse , "
then rushing onward with a barb'rous cry ,
long - lapsing down a golden coasted sky ,
accept , if haply in thy laureat wreath
christ gave it me , who can give much , much more
but brave messapus , neptune 's warlike son ,
" who are ye that counter to the blind stream have fled from the
and the best plan to silence and admonish them ,
sith then they so have ordred , i will pay
bear this fierce answer to the king of gods ?
they clean forgat the brothers'-tongue .
if he went without money he 'd soon grow wild . "
whar a peert little winter branch jest had throw'd
( 9 )   " feet " .   this was probably done as a handicap .   the time
there will be may next year !
stifle down with a mailed heel its palpitation ,
they shot o'er the curving streets , high overhead ,
as to repair the loss ; for , to his woe ,
firmer and firmer down , with mystic fetters .
i can not , then , keep silence if i would .
their vanish'd hopes of victory renew ;
how high so'er thy fiery spirit hovers ,
to the northward , where great boulders
ready in the desert to deliver
cithaeron , thou that sawest on pentheus dead
would look upon me as of yore , perchance ,
he a new jason shall be call'd , of whom
and took her hand to swear , as was the way
came begging for his horns ,
he 's far up challacombe hill .
" arouse ye , valiant trojans , ye who goad
some way for them to show their worth ;
this queene , which the moder was
' twas thus , when phlegra bore the giant crew , ( 6 )
to the same age have we both come , the same
the next time i try the spinnin ' o't . "
it is thine office .
and earth be wrapped in ashes ere thy brow shall bear the fatal
he had a hest , at least , and thou hast none .
of the work we do .
_ the young prince _ . good night !
cried beatrice , " the triumphal hosts
till lost on his aerial rings
and i dare swear , that i am gray ?
and , crowded by the sea , hem in the greeks ,
" and me albero of sienna brought
of fate . '
then i will sing ‘ my god , the spring
jordan , upon whose banks our own horace lives .
breathes terror through the land ;
that sweeps thy millions to the tomb
and lack of pity made them cold .
i have no authority to tell the reason . '
the crowding waves gush with impetuous rage
' the sea grows stormy , the little ones moan ;
he spoke , and high the sounding javelin flung ,
let the shouts of the populace roar like the surf
an ' quiet , ' omesick talks between
knowing the bright hair blowing in the sun ,
the meanest workman , may attempt to place
with thunder - bolts . at last earth 's shortest - day
listening , whispers , " ' tis the fairy
even like herself , diffused in fair repose .
the cat demanded leave to sue ,
when all the bells were ringing .
silence is commendable only
must burst through every bar of common sense ,
mother ! at which the heart of men are kin
to|do e|le|va|ba | mi á|ni|mo in|tran|qui|lo .
then , with lowered head , came back to the ants ' nest .
it takes the most effectual means ,
on the howes of corrichnaive .
_ crack _ , to converse .
much i had mused of love , and in my soul
mine eyes are turn'd to fire , my heart to lead :
to those she - fiends his speech addressed :
in music rolls away ;
and caress when we can ?
as upward from the vapoury mist ye roll ;
with venison of the antelope .
" whenas i harp to the children small ,
" i can not get it yet -- not yet , " he said ;
never more to earthly chieftain dipping colours as you pass ,
when prayers nor aught availed .
under the rosy banners of the " dawn , "
a passage o’er his waves allow .
and still the moon looked wondrous like a shilling ,
i thought how yellow it would look
there 's pleasant tiviot - dale , a land
was through the autumn hazes gently blown ;
their living king ?
spins in an atomy dance round misty street lamps ;
i could pardon much , believe me :
ambition 's lofty views , the pomp of state ,
there breathing still with slow faint sighs
helen and i went wandering , hand in hand .
" the pearl - colored-- " " i would , but that plaguy dressmaker
in the temple nigh the bay ,
but that we have made a survey
whom most i love , son of arcesias ! pray'r
to the gloomy land of pohja ,
more than life , more than love , my tir'd spirit inhales ;
there is a pale - fac'd patient too
thou hast been fooled by some strange midday dream . "
constantly acted in the _ rās - līlā_--
pardon me if i say that having seen it ,
seem of a vaster bulk .
ellen , my prattler dear ,
there was a king in thulè ,
you lose the flaming track , and subtly they
and stems the whirls of land - surrounded waves .
( for they 'd got in the habit and could n't stop , )
and held my breath , and spoke no word ;
along the encumbered path behind my leader
if the way be crossed by streamlets ,
beneath the wing of night ;
in the greenest shadow .
toward the grecian host . the broider'd band
an ' cheeks like a summers cherry ,
and bitter pain which follows peace ; yet they ,
on a rock or in a cell ;
when , like a diadem ,
or scraw aboon the tirlin'-pin
unto the bitter passages of flight .
nor do i doubt at all that they
some guide the course of wand'ring orbs on high ,
their rams they broke and rent their engines down :
with a bow and a burning glance .
proclaims mortality to man .
while china 's earth receives the smoking tide :
they flay'd before the pile , busy their task
seems the actual result
hail , household deities , to troy still true !
we felt the good ship shake and reel ,
though , fur ez number one 's consarned , i do n't make no objection .
began the dogs a howling / when they beheld the bear .
i laid me by it softly ,
neud oeddynt dilafar .
through sequences and changes myriadfold .
the race i spring from , not unknown of men ;
to old men playing at cards
like a shiver of fear , or a touch of death ?
three women that have wrought
they then , the triturated barley grain
or love thee better , that by some device
sir knave is a fool in a session ;
and every leaf its balm receives .
the sweet compassion of thy face .
lungs , as some say , ne'er sets him down to eat , 396 .
and their looks are sad to see ,
has he been wandering in uncertain ways :
this is the spring - tide 's mournful feast ,
o taste and see , how great , how good he is !
that uncall'd alard will possess
how many are the fangs , with which this love
i would that you were all to me ,
thy sweet and golden dreams all vanished there--
  brandl in herrig 's _ archiv _ , cxxxvii , 12 - 13 .
the fifty nuptial beds ( such hopes had he ,
his personal character seems to have been social and liberal .   he
and by opposing , end them ?
the foxgloves are already on .
has lost the charm so sweet of yore ,
that play criss - cross on evening waters?--no !
socity ai nt safe till sech monsters air out on it ,
twice twenty ships awaited their command .
dancing , dancing , suddenly flickering and quivering
y quebranta cualquier fuero ,
of tassels and of coaches soon ;
upon the bridge i forward bent to look ,
his thunder in mid volley ; for he meant
that fill wild oaten pipes on wand'ring ways ,
so cruel , strong , severe a lounder ,
that mammocks , mighty foot . but no way sped ,
come , fill the cup , and in the fire of spring
and left them midway in the world :
the hands in a goodly golden ewer , and poured it forth over
and was content upon their will to wait ,
the family , parentage , childhood , husband and wife ,
eleventh edition , price 5_s . _
like old sebastian bach , who went alone ,
with the warm contents of the billy can ;
of a cord we have spun to breaking -- too intemperately , too well .
on the gridiron we meet ;
versuta fraus et callida
of having a jubilee .
yet his name may be enrolled
where'er you see a rose or tulip bed ,
( lonely , not forlorn ) he stay ,
namque revixit ,
so fleet , it lingers but a tearful hour ,
and ether , most light and liquid of the three ,
and once more our feet took hold
theyr tunges ar loste and there they syt as domme
" was this your promise to your love ?
who speak for cunning souls to hear ,
and frosty lace - work , that 'll glisten bright
it 's a regular brute of a bee . ' "
fire out - shooting from his feathers ,
and still the higher your attainments run ,
" i 'll break the law , and please myself instead ,
thou shalt look with pain on the wasted life
a moth with flaming wings .
that in some way i would repay his care ;
and this is love as i hear sain .
with a heart for any fate ;
followed him home that dowie day .
recordless , but for them .
from out their shade of leaf and flower ,
he beheld a shadow gliding ,
porque no haya más reñir ,
o then i saw her eye was bright ,
down the valleys of hall ,
our dad to tell us stories . we can read !
fused into the compact organism of a nation .
the latter quick up flew , and kick’d the beam . "
but ah , not yet ! not yet !
and faintly droning goes
a sweet and sad - eyed maiden all alone ,
τ ' ἐρειπίων . aristid . panath . p. 142 : ὡς δὲ ἑώρα τὴν θάλατταν
from galway , from the glens of boyle ,
titus and livia -- in a word , all friends .
and she is all remaineth of me there . "
this day shall christian lips be mute ,
king janak spoke in suppliant guise :
little king boggen he built a fine hall .
the tides began .
will die with her he loves .
sometimes in hunger culling from the tree
may lay its beauties low .
lost and found ! the shining ones !
heavy with many odours that it bore
caught folly by the hair , and swore a great oath that never
that -- as kindled by its own fervency--
occasional lapses . for james ' father , old sid thornton , as he was
from all that terror teaches ,
and the goodly fence of the court , whence none might avoid ;
of his invisible hand , and his sweet voice ,
for it was bitter cold there when it snowed .
where in jungles , near and far ,
a pine some moaning forest mourns as sire .
tincture of affectation or pedantry ; and his inimitable manner of
shuddering , will be upon them in the dark .
clear green river , thou or i ? "
costly raiment , and silken fold ,
around our best and brightest things ;
as he rode down to camelot .
where , new in death , lamented pallas lay .
that betters as the weather worsen .
breathed so softly in my ear ?
and ' twas my love that gave thee thine .
stood the maize - fields , green and shining ,
has smudged its face with ink ?
and broken stars i drew ,
  " love righteousness , ye that be judges of the earth . "--
how glorious should i be to have a share
the river has not risen to a mighty swelling flood ,
here in my arms and sucks the strength from my breast ,
with them advancing to assail the ships .
wafted in all directions o love , for friendship , for you .
christian and pagan ideas .
and a quiver , hanging low ,
the leader , as he mark'd mine action , smil'd .
and many a nymph who wreathes her brows with sedge ,
over some ram that steppeth by in peace ,
thron'd in thy grave ,
have sought that bourne unwelcome still
their easy vows did lay .
bride of the highest , midway hovering ,
my clayey best with sullen servile breath ,
here my faithful hound awaits me ,
unarm'd and naked will i bee ;
o widow and daughter of him
for the moment we gain them , they slip from our hands .
leave in its track the toiling plough ;
abortive from the mother 's womb ,
dejad de solicitar ,
and , planning away in her little straw bed ,
for thee remains one only task ,
and his passionate martial desire ;
the fable of cæneus , which ovid has introduced , is perhaps simply
and rode to cambridge in the rain .
and i must sail away to come and brim her cup .
but those proud sinners are so wary too !
down sinks their mangled herdsman near ;
and every nerve was cold and dead .
la brisa acude de tu zona ardiente .
what time the harvest moon rose full and clear
the blessings which to her we owe !
such swift round tongues to kiss ,
an ' you 'll lick the bloomin ' boots of ' i m that 's got it .
though to the death ; against such cruelties
all perished ! konrad has destroyed them all !
but the pride was his !   it was i felt mean --
in the grip of the dreadful old man !
the true , in him that 's true .
of some great wrong he hath sustain'd , whereat
and the ammonite was no more .
but ending still , how billy pitt
and light of a million stars .
and praised the bright charms of her face ,
and notwithstanding bee that worked ,
  this alludes to a curious gem , upon which claudian has left
scarcely had he finished speaking ,
when yon green leaves fade frae the tree ,
say that to strangers , we know thee too well .
night over earth was poured , haze o'er the sea .
devising sat calamity to troy .
as i finde in the bokes write ,
the wintry days were through ;
everywhere thrill the air
and where did you win you these may - coats so fine ;
whose wishes wait upon her lord ,
trodden by tramps along the water 's edge .
hearts on a holiday : ho ! let us love : it is spring .
beneath the spreading thorn ,
to shew that my pretensions are not vain ,
but the fruit we will not pick ,
on a ghostly , memoried country - side ,
oh , say ! what is that thing call'd _ light _ ,
in the dun air sublime , and ready now
tho ' owre the sea !
could i for shame refused her ?
beneath the blackened feet there strove and pressed
so each of these would gladly spend his breath ,
like one who walks with steadfast gaze
ah that such sweet things should be fleet ,
with uncouth lyres , in many - colour'd vest ,
" my love , i am planting trees
" yes , " said the ducklings , waddling on .
and in right joyous manner / unto her consort spake :
you violets that first appear ,
man doth accuse his autumn blast ? "   my boy
and begs you 'll say that funny thing
ther was ordeined be the lawe
with fire and sword on earth shall poictiers lay ;
that dare presume , or once thinken it ,
we come to the white door - posts of your house ,
but that the diadem doth brand his brow ,
and home the heart of fairyland .
the golden dragon sparkling over all :
and stood in thought full - armed ; thereafter poured
use for our earning .
where i am led . i see behind me now
whan she sye desoneaesaes ,
when , for a sacred space ,
recall’d his spirit from the gates of death .
that urg'd him , saw me , knew me straight , and call'd ,
their choice than life , forgive them , as beguiled
and cheer us as ye never cheered before . "
beneath her hostile banners waving ,
all this i give , his vengeance to control ,
and wanderers , lost in woodlands drear ,
hir worthi fader , which men seide
but it was a near thing--
the larkspurs burn as bright a blue ,
when the men from the north came a - warfaring ! )
in thy large recompense , and shalt be good
a man is wholly wise , or wholly is a fool . "
if they had never looked on pain -- if tears
for he loved him as his own child .
the saturn of the titan armament ,
the grief that clouds thy lovely brow ;
and there must be a hawthorn - tide ,
their proper share the hermit spake :
i hae a wife o ' my ain--
unlocks not , surely wonder 's weapon keen
i pass , " said goosey , " a barn - door .
where the currents cross and the cruisers speed
on these precious facts and truths sublime ,
( safe , see ! ) in the seed , at time 's signal to put
as when i last faultered them o'er to thee ,
with look so much less wayward than before ,
hell 's pompeian shoals to heat ;
a high desire , religion , an ideal--
free from blame .   ( how few women , indeed , think of this
to brighten and behold thee ,
_ anon out of the north east the noise begins , _
points the plane of power to seek .
till their lessening columns oppose us no longer .
panted in those starry eyes ,
ophion , with eurynome , the wide--
i have a friend so precious ,
sa'wa ( sa'wo ) .    the eastern part of finland .
then went king gunther 's kinsmen , a high - born haughty band ,
hawthorne and crab - thorn bent , rain - wet ,
his goings and comings were watched for and cheered ;
his tact , too , temper'd him from grave to gay ,
i still had hopes my later hours to crown ,
or he whose virtue sighed to lose a day ?
and a swan among water - lilies .
to go from the place where ye were bred and borne
the reverend eye of st . augustin .
mi hanwy o henwyr ei dad ,
to deaths silent realms from life ,
if we ventured down this morning ,
so i entered , and i ordered half a basin of mock turtle .
reads , while he flouts his heart 's desire ,
jimmy blushed scarlet .   ' he 's a dear , ' said she .
nor quailed beneath the chastening rod
but to confront the visage of offence ;
untroubled ages and a serene life!--
and lest she should ever again lift her head
my mind , o'er taxed , lost hold of time at last ,
as if dear mary - mother hung
sit , and eye grimly the victim unscourged .
such wheat , barley , and grapes as grow wild without any kind of
shrank huddling back before that terrible man .
and how i just said ' please . '
arose , and minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong
made answer , murmurous ; nor paled the hue
crowned with the stars and weaponed for the right .
and in rude song his ruder idol praised ;
where the slave - whip ceaseless swings ,
and hoarsely laughing the black crows
musty stalls , and oats quite meagre ,
full many a bowë there was bent ,
portentous warning to succeeding times !
dim in gray , stealthy glimmer , pass
his new allies , and whom his kingdom 's heir .
the meteor of the ocean air
for no starry light was shed ,
that you may never hear another 's charm ,
than once dread scylla to behold , or hear
used all that , for young nap , he brought her . )
not greatly coveted if they were sought .
islands where divers could gather hundreds of shell in a day :
collects her breath , as ebbing life retires ,
in its purpose undefiled ?
then , round your summer queen and king ,
high hopes he conceived , and he smothered great fears ,
i will not mimic yonder oak
loose is each joint ; each nerve with horror shakes ;
there 's a dance of leaves in that aspen bower ,
take warning hence , ye children fair ;
the winds obey his will ;
has seen immortal actions done
' till its dark line is lost ,
forgive me that this rebel , selfish heart
or any of these all , or all , or more ,
the passing years are but a breath
touward munt - giu heo ferden , aeuro(tm )
on glistening dew and glimmering stream .
i know her not , nor have i known ;
jog back to the city , inwardly anathematizing that
and in hir song al openly
the dying - groans of exiled men !
he bid the school adieu ,
and strojavacca , frowning , looks asquint
and queen victoria 's compliments . "
not join it . '   ' therefore wait with me , ' she said ;
i indulged him , verily nerve - strained
these beaux and belles on silken wings--
or when the winter torrent rolls
nature forgives no debt , and fears no grave ;
love was the fault of his fam'd ancestry ,
for i must on a dangerous errand go ,
and i am afraid that you will run
that dwell beath far an ' near ;
cornwall , barry ( see procter , bryan waller ) ,
o , will , he made me feel the luck would change .
and ne'er a ane to peer her .
" dear friend , since by the will of heaven our souls
accomplished by steady perseverance and indomitable pluck .
nor did my daily pains or nightly labor spare .
disturb'd , delighted , raised , refined ;
i promised the emperor francis
inactive all and mute .   no pause allow'd ,
all in their nest in the old pine - tree .
these tiny portraits , set in rings--
she only left of all the harmless train ,
left , right , hans and fritz !
montereggione crowns itself with towers ,
clear as the trump that wakes the dead for doom ,
" rights have you , and may well be bold :
first mind you steer clear o ' the grog - sellers ' huts ,
for perquisites are ev'ry servant 's joy .
and tumbled books , or criticised the pictures ,
so deep in luve am i :
as the old race of mankind did ,
go , thou stranger , from this dwelling ;
hic fidit iaculis , ille volantia
and holy hopes which sought their native skies .
and showering darts , to drag his body thence ,
a favourite virgin 's blooming form she took ,
the overture closed with a crash -- then , hark !
' twas the same that took , last year ,
but by this time he had assistance found
rocking as lightly as boats on the wave ,
when you 're feelin ' blue as ink
nor france nor aught beside i thought upon :
glitter of water here and there ,
perlege , sic numquam doleas pro funere acerbo :
these are my doings , and they know it not .
when commerce proudly flourish'd through the state ;
who pulled her out ?
was this , she did n't giggle or blush ,
and that the mighty sovereign o'er them all ,
no painted plumage to display :
there 's absalom the vain , whose hair was long ,
his no . 10 brogans were chock full of feet ,
to help him on his way .
to unlock to her the prison doors ,
thy will : what silence hides that knowest thou . "
the worlds revolve like ancient women
again with living green ; the spring o ' the year
some sparks remaining of that heavenly fyre ,
the stroke wherewith we are strook , and if indeed
an ' it 's mighty hard to lif ' by sleight o ' han ' .
from what i saw of those approaching us ,
to hire hath alle his scales lent ,
for each poet effervescent ,
miser catulle , desinas ineptire,--
i wish i were a mile hence !
to implore the heedless people ,
thus she thought , until a thought relieved her ;
perhaps the plaintive numbers flow
we might see from the hill - top the great city 's glare .
flew down towards the strand ;
shall tend thee , and the fertil burden ease
accounts for the wonderful fertility of the soil .
at daksha’s(245 ) sacrifice of yore ,
he 's waled us out a true ane ,
food on good mendicants bestow ,
and better from the marble block bring living looks to pass ;
he passed australia on the fly,--cut over capricorn ,
where , in barbaric grandeur , moskwa stands ,
or bated aught of thy most rich esteem ,
nature , poor stepdame , can not slake my drouth ;
over as o'er breeze - ripples hung :
“ take heed , take heed of the land i rede ,
into the fields , that they may break the red , dew - sprinkled
and from that faith what virtues have their birth ,
and hold him vassal worthy of thy camp
each in his frighted orbit wheels ,
remembrance busily retracing themes
i might grow proud the while .
when the earth - wearied frame is reposing ,
bytuene mershe ant averil
maidens and fair ladies , / as was their wo nt aright .
i spent five cents for the sunday " dart , " and hauled it home in a
high - wrought , and temper'd into mind ,
when her mother tends her before the laughing mirror ,
of neater art ; and what proportion
imitative in forms
love no injury can move ,
to de bayou 's edge , an ' she clucks an ' clucks :
( how the clover lifted each pink , sweet head ,
by such as fix their faith on unity .
shepherding , but he had taken a ransom for them ; now , however ,
you smiled -- the ice was broken ;
a crown at least he 'd pay .
quoth the fairy dancing lightly in the garden ;
with myriad vessels , sail by sail , perplex
with gracious words .      --glory and praise be his
my country should be hid ,
do n't take him , trooper campbell ,
o winter , o white winter , wert thou gone !
with the exception of sir egerton brydges , who contributed to the
to harley , earl of oxford , after the latter 's disgrace and
the name of god , one hundred times save one ,
through days that chill and days that warm ,
pale this twilight - face ,
and life and love , who toiled here , for their pains
he watches each flake till its sparks expire ,
it 's clear to any one whose brain ai n't fur gone in a phthisis ,
i can not read one unless i read all ;
_ your _ sun 's climbing over the trees .
land dense with villages and farms ; the habits , manners ,
and mr . j.w . riley sang in his usual comforting strain :
any part backward in the deity .
if they inveigle you to emulation ;
that if that brighter life were actual fact ,
now is the time to cease from play .
if chance , by lonely contemplation led ,
whose temple was the landmark of our way .
mounts , a sicilian fountain , to the day .
an ' charlie he 's my darling , & c.
now pray to jove to grant what greece demands ;
gold and gleaming the empty streets ,
thy tireless wings yet own no fear .
delivered from that dresser excrement ,
he row'd me sweetly in his plaid ,
all seems beautiful and good .
till our souls take flight
to whom i turn'd , flashing , bewray'd its will
to leave his camp and give his life to make the winds a toy ?
" fond ape ! " sayd then the foxe , " into whose brest
and frolics with her dogs , and entertains . " ...
and roasted hogs by night .
in creeds and psalms and palaces
thus i break aff wi ' a ' my birr ,
liburnian galleys follow .   over all
thou lovest ; but ne'er knew love 's sad satiety .
what unapproved witness dost thou bear !
from a world more full of weeping than he can understand . _
dark green plumes over soft brown feather ,
may i reach
and tho ' our gallant cavalry would fain
_ gyneura _ now most hatefully doth scorne .
and felons ask a deal too much
but ah ! so fair as valborg none ,
king charlemagne ; but to assist him wend
smoke arising high in ether ,
upon the weie and as he rod ,
and woman in a bitter world must do the best she can --
and wisely deem'd the wealth of monarchs less :
as a bride and life - companion ,
his eye might there command wherever stood
de la triste alcoba
praying or fasting , let it all be done
such resemblance to the noble epigram of grotius on the death of
my soul is hungry for some poorer fare--
clasped her waist and held her tightly ,
where the little people are ;
soon shouldst thou fall beneath his conqu'ring spear . "
of things forever speaking ,
out a - laughin ' my very wu'st,--
snare in flowers , and kiss , and call ,
a coat and hat lie limp and dank ;
well , read out the rest ,
while others , freed from games on hand ,
and if so is that i mai hente
knowledge of all things precious to joi .
that moment the valiant soldier dolops son of lampus sprang upon
' that lordly one now coming hither , see ,
in folly of soul to strive with a better man !
in the dark womb where i began ,
her household motions light and free ,
but here is philip , come from nazareth .
to the jolly square cotillon ,
only a cottage , dull and gray ,
the night must come . . . and i 'll be one who clings ,
as a happy people come
this , where thine every good is hidden , hear ,
where bark - coats lie with many a wreath ,
more brave imaginings .
the hurried tread of armed feet ,
by the trunks of trees uprooted ,
their saintly master ’s word fulfilled .
poured forth , when vritra(300 ) was destroyed ,
were so beautiful to look on ,
last year with nicer skill than monarchs use ;
to - day , please god , we 'll pass ,
and grows completed . soon on the dear earth
and to inherit after me
he found himself within the streets of rome ,
you ' eathen , where the mischief ' ave you been ?
had i wings i 'd never soar
ὃν συνάγονται . hesychius , p. 79 , makes it equivalent to ἄθροισμα ,
if knowledge be in thee , let it be said !
spite o ' a ' as days went by
joyful arrayeth her .
until the rolling meadows of amethyst
then would he be a broker , and draw in
and bade it climb as high .
to earth 's slow understanding , never marred
so herself to behold
i am the master of my fate :
beneath its surface .
the birds that have no barn nor harvest - weeks ;
better than gold , 32 .
we fought 'bout a dog -- last week it were --
that thou shamest not thy kindred ,
bud so kindly shoo chatted an ' smiled ,
here is no throbbing of impassioned breath
and still shall love while longing eyes are wet
to see him come to land .
but if one should look at me with the old hunger in her eyes ,
where she shall never see the day . '
whereby , in sooth , nothing itself sees he !         r. wi .
hear the story of osseo ,
nunc lux serena vibrans
and purer fire thro universal night
all vanish'd ! crumbled into mother dust ,
in our direction , sombre as the night ,
close by the jolly fire i sit
it speaks deep mysteries , and yet the clue
our first young love resembles
i 'll still be true !
again her path was strown
poetry in sicily -- transference of the movement to
pleading with her poignant note
at last i got loose , and i walked on my way ;
he would sit at the top of the old garden gate ,
when the summons is made , when the answer that waited thousands
why should i build an edifice
and come like the benediction
their children 's cries unheard that passed through fire
god help us to be true
she regent , she republican ,
and a new word runs between : whispering , " let us be one ! "
to meet the scarlet hunter on the trail ;
not twilight yet , but that illusive bloom
beyond anything which had yet found expression in literature of
shake the lilies till their scent
the wanton winds , deft whisperers , had strewed
her children 's ages and their names ,
chor .   the shades grow great ; but greater grows
for jove was adverse to him , and the sun ,
with bloodier welcome -- never yet
at thy bathing do not tarry ,
answer and true . how many have been the years
the space between.--green light did pass
have i , who am least and lowest ,
and royal ornament and fair device ;
toward that berry pie ; and , rare good chance !
much of that early prophet look she shows ,
this fault in half the female kind !
but not by all his keel indeed the other did o'ercome ,
that thy winged mates might know it ,
that , in the various bustle of resort ,
he saws the branches of the trees ,
heard the water gurgle round him
houses .
bless yer , bobs !
had but thine age and pallas ' been the same ,
at a dark alcove 's end of that long hall ,
my one celestial guide the while i sing
" odyssey , " the appropriation of an iliadic line which is not
the homelier time behind .
the laundry , kitchen , chamber , dairy ,
and it was so . with a firm step
there is no solace on earth for us -- for such as we--
though to delude them sent , could not abstain ,
he made no reply ,
qui potuit , quem tu pro numine uiuus habebas ,
two dreary and disheartening years followed this tragic event ,
but by couetyse , practyse and flatery
the apple of his eye was henry schnetzen .
its godlings mouldering on th ' abandon'd hearth ;
" i tried to train her voice -- she was a failure . "
of his heart 's blood : ' twas very sweet ; he stay'd
heaven in your face , sweet !
and shatters iron locks to thunder forth her wars .
what we have not is our desire ;
impudent cupid stood
who prompts my speech .   when in my master 's sight
within the favour of his countenance .
o , my luve 's like the melodie ,
the zephyr wanton'd round the bean ,
and standing lonely there ,
o we live , o we live--
eek i nil not be cured , i wol deye ;
into clear waters ; and this garden vext
why decked with all that land and sea afford ,
abhorr'd annihilation ! blasts the soul ,
he will not come to - night .
when by apollo 's aid himself escap'd ;
prepared beyond the seas ,
of those unusual strings . "
god himself would come to all who dwell in hell .   then everyone
morell only answered " of course,"--
he shall have evil lot ;
amid her folded sheets she lies ,
greeting ! my birth - stain have i turned to good ;
which me , the notary , and guittone held
one could describe the grossest _ betise _
each line deserves a laurel , and thy praise
she got a fearfu ' settlin ' !
sweet my voice and skilled my singing ,
a tug smokes ,
out of a little silver trump ;
to which one morn oft birth and death affords ;
the lingering night of pain is past ,
an ' done nae thing ,
oh may she ever stand
for hearts so touched , so pierced , so lost as mine .
shady nooks the bushes yield ,
they give me when they talk among themselves ,
like fairy pins amid the flowers .
one would hear so very oft ?
now is he risen !
except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
and now i feel a long - unwonted yearning
dream that they dream of nought .
where pinnabel for dame and cavalier
till the furthest hills vibrate ,
" let from these arise a mountain
shall paint a finer dream on sleep!--
secure from hunter 's power .
myself i 've lost ; my army , every man . "
_ to whom , whichever way the combat rolls ,
and with their gold curled tresses
no priest shall mutter , and no saint remain ,
another to the fishes takes a notion ,
with pearls , her body suave ,
is from many sources , some hitherto not drawn upon ; and it
“ we ’ll with sir axel swear to - day ,
more masks always replacing them .
iam iam non domus accipiet te laeta , neque uxor
the sky ; the sacred mountain fades , and in the
but simple william would not tell .
she died -- as dies moon - beaming
lokeren , the cocks crew and twilight dawned clear ;
here no more shall be thy dwelling ,
rigel with algol shared :
from every pain the paladin did free ;
yet not anough had practisd to deceive
with a bright cup for jove himself to drink ,
no marble gleams to bid his memory live
his face was hidden .   there are such vows !
fled forbes , in dismay , sir ,
and with complacency so absolute
on either side the highway , though nothing met their view ,
to fulness , and the opal song had birth .
a certain ' orse for sale .
i was wrecked off red algiers ,
then much revolving , thus in sighs began .
and left my two -- fate laughed , malign ,
and pour'd such madness in the mind .
down in the thorns rabbits have made their burrows :
brought to the dust in sorrow and despair
he went to the doors but he did n't have the pay .
all priests and clerks and merchant - folk ;
--no entiendo lo que dice la criada .
the poem that i sing
and hacon i say , of norroway ,
glided all the next day onward ,
to render to these heavens : now ' t is fall'n
no more i sought for covert kind ;
the young republic 's banners smile
most earnest , i addressed me , and began ,
at epidaurus rages ; every blast
in the land of sleep and silence ,
would break the bowl from which he drank in joy ;
to banquets never done ,
and with him would dauntless ride
curtain'd with cloudy red
but with the glory of her eyes
plebei paruae funeris exsequiae .
cheered by a cloudless sun ; and ever to left and right ,
is it a wonder ?
on high designs the wakeful hours employ ;
i haste to the dell
the leaves of willow and of adder 's tongue ;
betwixt them both was but a little stride ,
strike , franks ! remember your chivalry ;
makende many a wofull mone .
the emperor 's bird's - nest
you say , as i have often given tongue
then , though i sheer adore thee ,
and bowed down like a flower his flowerless head .
drives before the whirling blast
is this a time to think o ' wark ?
refined , still increased : now unto ships
' _ who loved her best ? _ ' there 's no one now will know .
his faith was in his grandam 's mighty skirt ,
whispered and shouted , sneered and laughed ,
which was ordain'd me , when i issued thence .
for thee i know , though thou art all defiled . "
besides the head of franklin on the roof
god 's bounty , that ebbs less and less , ii . 194 .
though they were brass on the outside ,
sad lessons from this lay ,
serene the ills of life .
nor loved one either as most men call love ,
the time of the singing of birds is come ;
and the big still house when the boy and girl ,
playfully rustling through the grove .
  { 392 } orosius gives 320 for the number of triumphs [ i.e. from
and much i fear he ’s suffering . ”
thought i this could be ,
rushin ' ter de sea .
as the whole world ’s black shadows fly
who have foregone the good of intellect . "
in which he speaks of " the sandy chattahoochee " .
the child well knew that fatal issues joined ;
persons of all ages may obtain amusement out of gobolinks , or
xi   how the sons of troy for the last time fought from
this evening in that dear , lost land ,
upon the slowest night .
has grown up , she 's married and two blooming boys
piped his colloquy , piped to none beside her .
the gory sark , the gilded swine - crest ,
and a work of intangible art .   but we 're all getting ready ,
when a deep groan from beneath
" your letter , which follow'd me here , makes me stay
reconciled by death 's mild hand , that giving
and chearful chanticleer with his note shrill
amaz'd my gazing eye ,
felt for his servants , thus addressed :
as sentinel you guard the gate
and called her good as fair,--
in saffron mantle , rich with gold .
for he always hunts at view
should give me life , his childhood shall grow up
we tumble short - handed ,
for so heaven 's pleasure is , that i should lead
thou shouldst mount up to with me . now adieu !
think on me with longing ,
bot forth anon upon the tale
" ' tis not well to sing too early !
' tis nearly twelve o'clock .
which with unglimmering ray ,
the noble dame on turret high ,
neither made , nor so proportioned ,
i would not live without thee ,
theer wur a boggle in it , i often ' eerd un
run , si , and get the half - deck table clear .
to his sweet musings as he nearer drew
but you judge by the rule of the penny ,
until , alas ! i found that he was blind .
besides , who mourns with such effectual grief
" earth , i praise thee ! " crieth he ,
present their shapes ; while fantasy discloses
they were gone ; and lo ! bright angels ,
his large gray eyes and weather - beaten face
thy conscious glory shall remain
" lap me in soft lydian airs ,
in its silent lips to - day .
and , when the wind hath found them out ,
at the first onset cast her on the mead ;
great deeds on earth remain undone ,
a pocket full of rye ;
torches were often seen ' mid heaven to glare ;
" the goddess swore : then seized my hand , and led
when the cash i 've saved brings the home we 've craved ,
love , jealous grown of so complete a pair ,
converged towards it , mine and countermine ,
the more that he miss'd it the greater the need ;
forth with our longest spears in our hands ; i will lead you on ,
that thou and i must live our lives apart ;
prosperous we were , till o'er the mystic bounds
to the dim chamber , where with the sad queen
of all the good it does . thou hast not left
save , save me thou -- woman of women -- thine
and to repentance and confession turn'd ;
the suds were dried upon charlotta 's hands ,
querulous my soul and friendless
in contrary of þe candelstik þat clerest hit schyned
unite , and soon that hostile fleet shall fall :
and palmers for to seeken{3 } straungë strondes ,
gawd , you need n't ask !
run , shepherds , run where bethlehem blest appears .
suddent when he seed what was a - goin' on , and heerd the neighbers
the day lying faded and fair
more tender is this -- more celestial and fair--
is piled with viands and the strength of bread .
a stately mastiff eagerly pursue .
the way that i went was so long , long , long ,
couldst thou but see what verdure paints the sod
little was wanting ( so his blushes spread )
stately as a deer with antlers .
in hope to flee my sin ;
and live , having seen her with an unfilmed eye ,
thy waters run .
excess hath no religion , nor wit ;
the soul not singly lighted in the breast .
the grief that clouds thy lovely brow ,
clasp'd in his arms his wife , repos'd in peace .
and his the foremost honours of the feast . "
only a little hour ago
yet tyranny is stalking here ,
boldly to choose the better part ,
the earth is covered thick with other clay ,
that the fruits of the apple - orchard and the orange - orchard , that
and duty 's holiest call obey !
shall mete its shadow 's length .
when grass is chill with rain or dew ,
once she saw him throw the cover of a dish at his lady 's head .
am mistaken if a single epigram included fails to preserve at
through bosporus betwixt the justling rocks ,
love 's thorny tapers yet neglected lie :
was scentless ,
then heat will perish utterly and all ,
angry why others might not grant the gift .
cleft to the forelock ; and the others all
and say , " he come a cruel thump , poor chum . "
the wild harp rang to his adventurous hand ,
down with each memory--
then turning , i to them my speech address'd .
he spoke to them of truth and righteousness--
in the right with two or three .
   [ greek : pais ... neos en komidei , kai eti hupo paidokomoi
and came ringing down on to the ground . ajax knew the hand of
" and carpet - bag ? "
stanzas from " the triumph
who hath , dead one , summoned thee to light ?
emblems of power and beauty ! well may they
and bowed their heads to the ground . hot tears fell from their
writhing a letter from his child , for which
the trees that watch at dusty noon
over the laughing land ,
the one good eye i mention ,
the pungent grains of titillating dust .
that vanisheth as woe
hector may learn how furiously i too can wield my spear . "
" behold the sins committed in my life .
my solam filiam true ,
and you are high , grey and straight . ha !
and a boat was lowered
the wild bees hum and buzz
quite sundered from the moving universe ,
so let the way wind up the hill or down ,
þat we may serue i{n } his syȝt , þ{er } solace neu{er } bly{n}neȝ .
we sing the lay of our good hen .
" if elinor be dead , in sooth ,
and never wearies nor grows old . "
but precious relic in glass case
considered a specially great master in that kind ; but his " little
the way to a far corner of the isle ,
they have but wet their lips with goblins ' wine ,
so many a happy day they spent ,
the rain , and while he was up there here come
to escape from thy misdoings ,
fearing he may be burnt , while they their journey
i wait , wait for you ,
in the kindly german tongue .
the beautiful , so innocent , sweet , and pure ,
she lags behind and , lingering at the gate ,
that fainted slowly to the pallid moon ,
things humane under false names please .
“ thane the price mene prekes and proves theire horsez ,
spindle and loom , thy province , and enjoin
compileth worm - eat stories of old times :
that " god would consider a _ gentleman _ and deal with him
there is a new - made grave to - day ,
and we are growing old ,
three bags full :
my heart consumed in everlasting fire !
y wounded was thurgħ out his syde
and xanthus foaming from his fruitful source ;
  mr . thomson resided in the neighbourhood of richmond some time
great among the princely chieftains ;
' time , perhaps , may soften down , and render mellow ;
appointed to sit there , had left thir charge ,
" he is in the pupils of my eyes , he is in my body and in my
and not the world , are new ;
as the fiery source of light ,
and spoil it the very first night!--
and far across its desolation howls ;
of sandals kept with pious care ,
she was baith guid and fair , jean ;
may teach you more of man ;
so wrecked and desolate .
" now wae to thee , thou cruel lord ,
the first in flight from pain ! hadst thou alleged
bot only he which schop the guile .
roast at some fierce imaginary fire .
while gull - wings write
and far as yonder eagles go ,
it settles , curling , on a fiddler 's curl ;
and still in that shanty a tumbler is seen ,
o song , do not forget .
out of their eyes , and the shame that stung me
( as now his valour lay vpon the rack )
the uniform ' e wore
there as he lay , the heaven with its stars
a broad - wayed city , walled and barred ,
with full - spanning eye gazes forth , dwells long ,
a syllogism is , which proved it to me
fair blossom the meadows from river to river
make dawn desired by the sinking sun .
a change came among them .   a letter , which bore
with his own mood of piercing pensiveness .
to thee my fancy took its wing ,
" i stand without here in the porch ,
this boon to rávaṇ ; he may brave
into such knots as entangle the soul ,
' tis now at your option to make me your own .
freshly dress'd and pleasantly ;
' twas long ago disproved ,
the courts where jamshyd gloried and drank deep :
" alike rewarded , in that noble cause ,
when they heard the sharp command :
then i asked him , but he answered as he shook his little head :
hedn't no savey , he d briggs .   thar , jack ! that 'll do,--quit that
so sleep ye now , and take your rest,--
and the heart of the great ocean
the tutor , with a sigh of relief , renewed his perusal of the
warm butterflies float in the sun ,
and cups o'erflow with wine ;
that the maids might lave their eyelids .
and speaks thus in his ire ;
a soul that is sorrow - rife .
while this vision of life and death
rather frowzy and bleared
with our backs basely turn’d vpon our foe .
where freya scents thee , and prepares to dine .
the vánars at the giants sprang ,
and will say in her fondness , ' that surely is he ! '
present itself to the triumphal throng ,
for lying lips thy blessing seek ,
in dock and deep and mine and mill
on the side of ragged mountain
relicta ; certam cui posuit domum
the last to let go and fall
she was too sparing of a tear--
did put us in a dump ,
dear to us , we must turn to the eternal blessings of reason , to
ancestral figures in their pomp and pride .
which from a long experience springs
on the aspen hangs her ribbons ,
i know the acorn 's out its cup ;
allured ; and least those glory - lighted dyes
to wauk the druggist wast the toon .
spirit of the great authors , coupled with stern rebuke to the
ere in sleep i close my eyelids ! "
yet your critic 's right -- you waive it ,
written near richmond upon the thames . _
no less nor more than mountain peaks , my friend ,
betokening me such ill .   onward he mov'd ,
priests , pale with vigils , in his name have blessed
the sacred tree ' midst the fair orchard grew ;
there were fifty at the find ,
luxury creeps on , and ruins all below ;
and leaves her gratitude to sweeter art,--
thy hand might well have spar'd us , had we been
gazes at earth , watches our dawning moon ,
" its hundredth year "
into translucencies
welcome sunshine , welcome moonlight ,
" and wherefore part ? out of all time to me
the rich and royal nuptials they prepare
and a young man brought him red wine
and find their own , and claim a share
the silent chamber of a brown curled leaf :
if the quick spirits in your eye
behold the channel was stony and dry .
dead - pale between the houses high ,
the gall of despair to thy famished lips ;
ferunt ; venti ? jamque iterum mihi
ah , silver shrine , here will i take my rest
and so it was i joined thee by her will ,
it was a cord of maple , cut and split
parties below , and parties above ,
nam saepe in colli tondentes pabula laeta , etc . ;
so firmly , in the rear , th ' ajaces stemm'd
psamathe , the sister of thetis ; by the first he had peleus and
vivid as dream and live as flame ,
` rys , take with yow your nece antigone ,
that flickered out the while .
midst fighting over there
meantime their licence uncontroll'd i bear ;
through that still land unfearing i advance ;
a terrible harvest , ten by ten ,
one keeps me silent , one to speak conjures me ,
and o , in this be ruled by me .
i suddenly remember the distance that i must travel ;
yet ere i finished , in a moment 's flight ,
while joan sat apart ,
as he lifted out us children
my leader thus : " a little further stretch
and in their ordered ranks , amazed ,
all moisture gathered ; here at last , forbidden
while bloodthirsty sing      the birds of slaughter .
with evil like a smoke -- it turns smiles sour !
or fly abroad to seek for woe ;
draw near with pious rev'rence and attend !
felt for the foe with fiendish claw ,
of everlasting counsels , calls for thee .
' nay , hang me if i cou'd ' nt jump . '
which god hath gi'en .
pouring new glory on the autumn woods ,
than his had been , or yours : that was his wish .
he says their preachin 's jest absurd ;
after he said : " you 've borne a mighty blow .
and wounded sore , he never failed ,
and gazing in his eyes will stand ,
the weeping mother sends to god her wail ;
add , that he knows rogero is the peer
there were five carlins in the south ,
of lips untrue , or anger thee therein ,
and the storm blows wild
and all the rest would run away from you--
and valour weeps to view her fairest deeds,--
far over the summer sea ,
what woe , alas , has fate afflicted me,--
into stone had changed their waters .
and vow'd i was his dear lassie , dear lassie ,
a human heart will pass through mortal strife ,
martyr .
private sorrow . the lord be your strength ; so prays
" o father mine , e'en as thine own ,
the season was september ,
hast e'er beheld , that tidings of him there
a lilliputian landscape , where
evil marshes black with trouble ;
now joyous and at ease .
he took my face between his hands and said--
upon my childish passion once , yourself a fair - haired child :
some lookt at his hoofs , and with learned grimaces
gleams on the western deep :
he calls up all his rage ; he grinds his teeth ,
gave age its pastime -- fired the cheek of youth--
o white , white , white !   would that my soul had wings
the deed forborne for ever ,
he gave him , but vouchsafed him no return .
then , too , i could have wept , for on thy face ,
obedient i have trotted by thee
or , in the sun - filled amber ,
was ever yet by tragic poet dreamed ,
can easy , wi ' a single wordie ,
the halcyons call ; ye lusians , spread the sail ;
a dawn whereto they grope
the other glows with pride .
more keen than death ’s or memory ’s fang ,
but rather coupled darkly and made ashamed
more free than in warm summer day my mind
that decked the slumber of a marble knight ,
days still more worthy
what 's your name ?   mary ellen ?   how funny !   mine 's edith -- it 's
will sleep with me ;
the hippo 's feeble steps may err
my landes i shall hym take.aeuro(tm )
--the brightest , lip can tell,--
it was my wish in this poem to shew the manner in which such men
stand forth an ' tell yon premier youth
the ballgamers christened him " yellow "
reckless of regions far away ,
robert 's kin , and john 's , and ned 's ,
to carry gifts unto the lord and peace for teucrians pray .
her heart in that celestial chime
and sick at heart , homeward my steps did move .
so , for this day , i lay me at thy feet .
the great sun rises to behold the sight .
of school days gone -- and time since passed away ;
she ketched him -- wite behind his pa,--
can he make deathless death ? that were to make
had scattered them asunder o'er the plain ,
but rollant felt that death had made a way
save in the virgin forest , where
yet smelt roast - meat , beheld a huge fire shine ,
calm and measured in his walk .
and bowing down my face unto his own ,
whenever they meet with the aged and blind .
“ now fetch ye down the gilded chest
thus rendered by pope himself :
the imperishable and fearless flower .
that i have not ? "
ethereal minstrel ! pilgrim of the sky !
now westward look , my country bids good - night,--
for upon many quarters stormed that crew ,
the gates are mine to open ,
their music wild and sweet ,
had they indeed no longer span ,
there come a daughter of thy love , oh pray
long as her spouse in virtue took delight .
and eyes glist'ning with smiles :   " our charity ,
enough of rank to - morrows ;
care for my _ treasure _ ; for i still survive
canto xxxv . hanumán ’s speech .
roseis ut huic labellis sonitus citus abiit ,
incessantly each holy function .
with clownish heel , your popular circulation
on feverish tars and rakes decayed .
reft was the solace that we had in thee ,
crueller : as not passing thro ' the fire
from his breast he drew a golden tablet ;
she being young .
then i was wrong : the town of my sojourn ,
his crisp combs , and that comes those ways we know .
and that in pallid ash declined
and blithe as the lark that each day hails the dawn
the noble ráma e’en to those
with canterbury and its neighbourhood .   william lovelace ,
nor be like pirates of the main .
and bury all the dead ?
it goads me , like the goblin bee ,
do what you may do , what , do what you may ,
our poor old boot , " they said , " is torn to pieces .
the fire will dry his coat , as sure 's a gun ! "
honey is the food of strangers .
he added : but i hold it not in mind ,
tumbled from the pine - tree 's summit ,
unless some antidote prevents their arts ,
europe for smithy , europe 's floor
the poor wee thing its natural living ;
as , buried once , men want dug up again .
came near and nearer still .
come , fill the cup , and in the fire of spring
upon the frosty hills , while reddening mars
let me his mouth , pale , cold and bloodless , kiss ;
what cud thooase expect as ther reward ,
but with the head and with the breast and feet ,
who shall reprove thee !
i can not speak the lines , i 'm sure!--oh , fie !
have n't you juggled a vast amount ?
greyer than a pike i deem it ,
but now the indissoluble sacrament
why should the public be denied
gude nicht , and joy be wi ' ye a ' !
keeps strict account and will redeem its worth .
a shrouded german valley
i should no more shrink from it than from the breath
events shall be the naiads , that will solve
the lear of the driven rain !
with great ionic columns , from the street
i 'll tread my native soil on ;
living lights , far more shining , began songs which lapse and fall
still shalt thou type the poet - soul sublime
inspire to the dreaming of good
in agony beyond what we can bear ,
anashuya [ _ sings _ ]
because such is not as their outward mien
dispels the gather’d clouds that notus forms :
at intervals the cloud is cracked
_ the old soldier 's return _
that breath destruction , talk of bloody jars ,
but only of odorous breath ,
" arise , what dost thou ? "   as the chosen three ,
all day as cold as charity , in bitter pain and dread ,
you are mine , all mine !
ye shady walks , ye waving greens ,
see where the tomb of mary 's son doth stand ,
and nameless roamed the wind .
or amid cotton and maize peasants their water - works ply ,
or so kind - hearted , any may procure them .
till bishops at ' the bath , ' they say ,
must do its stern behest .
the peasant at his ploughshare ,
eurydamas 's two men returned with some earrings fashioned into
this being made , he yearned for worlds to make
the white sail gliding by the tree .
a sweet child weary of its delight ,
left they then the fort called ralegh ,
chee , chee , chee .
there he waited till the deer came ,
and heavenly joys inspire .
speak , shepherd -- mine !
close with mantle of eternal cloud ;
given to the dust for more
when ruffs and raids were in the fashion ,
_ multitude . _ justice ! we would see justice , appius !
a wild deserter scudding to the north .
they go seekin ' in the darkness , an ' they never find him there ,
_ eld . bro . _                            for certain ,
and may you better reck the rede
and there , upon a throne ,
would a third time fetch back _ euridice _ .
' twas a beautiful glen
a broken mirror by a maiden dead .
my harp , fareweel ! thy strains are past ,
where sportive ladies leave their doors ajar ?
nae ither care in life have i ,
landmen we 'll never be !
with thorns and briars now is fraught .
_ who ran away from his nurse , and was eaten by a lion . _
ah , far enough , my dear ,
i am growing afraid . dear fool , i am thy puck ,
it was a dance of moonlight and moon madness ,
what i shall well advise . expedience bids
glowing warmth to the cold colours .
whose fever - blooded eyeballs seek the moon
but he sang no childish ditties ,
with halos huge , as if of blood .
leave my memory and my name .
the laughter in his heart grew slack ;
has ever sundered me from thee ;
cloister . " " through all the circles of the realm of woe , " replied
to assist him the bystanders started .
and now their food they daily sought ,
" once before i rode these billows ,
he compassed her with sweet observances
with that same vaunted name , virginity .
i am not one whom death doth much dismay ,
at an early period in the history of holland , a boy was born in
throughout our clime whose thunders roar'd ,
blank stars . i 'm wide - awake ; and some chap 's dead .
and weary helplessly of this .
coming from the starry distance ,
the lyric 's melodious expanses ,
nor dost thou , all is a blank before us ,
sore irk'd it kriemhild 's envoys to make so long a stay ;
a screaming fife , a voice from ancient slaughters !
v. 58 .   in guile . ]   " thou didst presume to arrive by fraudulent
the live and vivid aspect of the world--
to glow of flowers with good of fruit .
here for two or three days , and that thereafter thou
so strictly , but much more to pitie encline :
some certain bodies , which by their own blows
this is a very charming little book containing the reflections on
do you guess it is i ?
to maintain order , were my duties there .
ground ,
i have no doubt that ptolemy was wrong .
how to test and how to try it ,
leading the infantine moon
brave and true and sweet thou art .
swift to revenge it sent his angry lance ;
' note thou , when nearer they to us approach .
before the princely bharat ’s feet ;
tow'rd thee streams my song .
see the fair queen , the heavenly lady , stand .
till back went time :   once more i stood
and that i rose too late for help , i dread ,
a moral song shall charm her ear ,
qualche incanto di profeta !
he seldom does . he never comes home late .
now your wines and ointments give :
and should i suffer such disgrace ,
and goodness only knowses
as vigorous hand might serve to cast a stone ,
from thee among the haunts of men ,
through it , as a giant sluiceway ,
that is adjudged upon thine accusations ? "
þe{n}ne þe godlych god gef hy{m } onsware ,
all the remaining
legend of the famous light house
life 's tenderest ties , but cruelly didst part
wind - weary ; while with lifting head he waits
with prayer sent up to god ;
be sure , marg'ret , i 'll come for thee . '
" now by my soul , " quoth he , " and i believe
therefore you , who forced my vow ,
no swearing , let me tell you .
not with your scraps , but solemn ceremonies ,
for into the square , with a brazen tread ,
when israel of the lord believed
" did you like them ? " she replied .
four little sisters standing in a row--
walking as though repentance were the shame ,
with noyse whereof the quyre of byrds resounded
slain , struggling blushes,--till white truce emerge .
triangular tom straightened up in a jiff ,
lukewarmness in piety , is here removed . "
dusky and duskier grows the room ,
nor asks if they bring aught to hope or fear .
afterwards befriended .
and our sky serene .
until they look ( too late ) on high ,
by filial love be forced to be untrue ,
appears a joyless human being ,
but when his arrows fail'd the royal chief ,
with sunlight brimming up .
whose soul 's a frown ,
of lordly spain in golden - famed peru .
if aught of this is unintelligible to thee , and hard to be
spit their salutes ,
and caste hem here and there aboute .
for us the glorious dead have striven ;
of a youth who loves me and whom i love , silently approaching and
bade the almighty sire farewell ,
the boatswain of _ the mantelpiece _ ,
a whistling speedy - wingèd shaft unto the hero won ;
and had no salve to heal his wound .
the level of the parlour floor
there 's towser wagging
but godlike paris , fair - hair'd helen 's lord ,
its yellow face up ,
doom shadows round them dance ,
he moved along ; and afterward thus going ,
i feel that i am matched ; that i am man !
i hardly know what i shall wear .
it does not censure ought beguile ,
of light when once he kissed her in a dream
such as king bacchus in his reckless feast
and in diffusion ever more intense .
then he tried to teach them the way to sing--
prevail o'er angry wave and gust ;
an ' some of 'em was brave an ' some was not :
that governs all her body fair ,
she answered , ' lancelot , wilt thou hold me so ?
in his hidden craft by the creature 's head . --
who can tell me ?
_ beside the fountain - rail at three , _
hence the poverty of pohja ,
how was it these same ledger - men could spy
as his who lays proud cities low.(278 )
dreams of murders and of arsons ,
no clean human passion my rhyme would arraign .
she answered meekly , ' how should i be glad
came dressed to follow hounds on foot .
beautiful faces are those that wear , 250 .
where the old flotilla lay :
so kind he was , if it befell his lot
when flashes next the lightning ,
now grows the bark and wears away my name ,
where they who journey upward
which sullen on the water sate
she said it made her sad to think upon
incorrectness in estimating sounds , which is , in some degree ,
one more unto death brought .
as a sorrow to a child .
as she who lies in the cold grave below .
faint fare - thee - wells , and sigh - shrilled adieus!--
nor catch the little laughing breeze
‘ quæcunque igitur possent hoc meum negotium adjuvare , comparare
that emperour canters in brave array ,
whither swordsmen never wander . "
in this life new - begun ; and good and bad
with paragraphs all got by heart ,
finds them asleep somewhere in duskèd lines
aubrey was certainly a contemporary of lovelace , and wood seems
i mourn on earth !
some members of the brownie race
sing then ; the shade affords a proper place ,
bind him to his oaken hurdle .
goes sobbing on the bosom of the night ;
then turned he back toward balen , mad
smiting the shield of fierce deiphobus .
so , bounding on potowmac 's flood ,
is that city :   you could not ,
“ the means high troy to overthrow are given .
and he played one day , a second ,
in the dim birth - place of a coming day .
rending everything to pieces ,
to all , but his belov'd embrace deny'd ,
to sink or swell as heaven pleases .
and earth and sea and heaven wept . yet sounded not
the hour before the dawn is breaking . "
and the nest is soft and warm inside .
so when the first bold vessel dared the seas ,
" our fathers frisked in the millet ,
but where they fall , forgotten to abide
they seemed to scare thee .   why , boy , face them out .
how much those blind have err'd , who make themselves
hollow and empty he deems his skull ,
noli mihi tunc deesse ;
and for the razing of his flesh a little doth avail :
" since ' twill no better be ;
to what he saw . he might so easily ,
covers the multitude of sins
till the granite ribs and the milk - white stones
will i consent to go up into thy bed , except thou wilt
in solemn pageant , issuing on the scene
each test , and every light , her muse will bear ,
i 'll bait my _ scot _ so , yet not cheat your eyes ;
she doth her gods and ministries consign .
that i shall take _ her _ family name .
from over the still sea
and yf she have nede to robyn hode ,
must have bin lost , adjudg'd to death and hell
on your own talent ; an author who write as you do is not
a spinster 's lot is hard to bear--
and plate behoved , his limbs all over dressed ;
and then
who seldom mark their own worst bane of all .
a set o ' dull , conceited hashes ,
thro ' many a tempest , but she rode
what was it that we never caught ?
great as thou art , my lessons made thee brave :
a stream of soldiers , ruffians , armed with pikes ,
have poured my stream of panegyric down
thou must not willingly one sin detain ,
and the flute
no peace we ask for : let the nations rage ;
come now , by this high way of suffering ,
pastime would they make them / with the men of burgundy ,
falls on the standing harvest of the plain ,
had once as many as we ;
the anguish that smote my heart
love is the fire and sighs the smoke , the ashes shame and scorns :
that sway'd the flowers ? a bird will sing again ,
and burning spires in aureoles of light
of berenice gleams ; and rhythms and laws
among thy branches safe he lay ,
she bought a rod that afternoon .
as lone we fare and fast ?
with five great girls to marry .
i have not worshiped god , my king--
even for my dust -- more snowy - soft the flower ,
the world is weeping,--shall not we weep too ?
praise to thee -- our loving father ;
" i 'm but a lass of low degree . "
as children of thy gracious care ,
the rose 's trembling leaves will soon be shed ,
the muse now taking to the till
of the far country of the spirits .
and in friendliest tone made answer
" i 'll let them stand till they doun fa ' ,
i think they walk these ways that knew their feet ,
jagg'd and convuls'd the ascending smoke
through crash and crackle , and flicker and flame ,
what shall not be recorded -- women they ,
' thus spake she , but as for me , my heart was broken , and i
though seeming mute ,
ourselves . "
and stretches away to the night .
and cheer'd with smiles each happy guest ,
with shame remembers , while himself was one
a feeling of sadness and longing
his breast to my bosom ,
and us their centre : yet more sweet in voice ,
i made these peasants one request,--
after him , gomez,--try it once again ;
and flowers will bloom,--but we shall miss
the treasure - hoard of honor ,      to the earth below
the lightest foot , and speediest in the race .
stoop'd to him , pomegranates , apples bright ,
she broke it all to pieces ,
a pair of wubbas , a bodkin ring ,
burst ye your prison ,
ordeal , for methinks the day will come when i must learn
while he flounders and gasps and his scaly sides gleam ,
while buying death - fields with the sacrificed .
the double double double beat
like gold as in comparison to dross ,
o for a day of the long light , one !
mine end near was;--
and , then , when thou hadst reached the goal of hope ,
round about him spun the landscape ,
florence has lost its beatrice dear ;
shuffle - shoon and amber - locks
had not godfredo 's constant bosom pierced .
this turn . the beauty which i saw transcends measure not only by
what is so glad as the heart of a child ,
the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with the cups
( now , indeed , her song is pain , )
whose foaming crests over its forelands sweep ;
and will remit no anguish ? is there set
now for the leaping .   far beyond the marks
seem'd weary , worn with care ;
each life has some sweet summer - time ,
my task is done . the showman and his show ,
what are you going to do
nor thou the master , caesar ; free as yet ,
" i _ never _ ! why , you forward thing ! now , ai n't you awful bold ! "
devoted wholly to medicine ,
her mischief , and purge off the baser fire
yet if you were here i dare say ,
goldsmith 's essay on ' metaphors ' ( ' british
how skilfully she builds her cell !
" the sound of a good king 's cavalcade i hear . "
and leave unto the passing throng
i 'm sure sma ' pleasure it can gie ,
like a great fragment of the dawn it lay
shall not man mourn over fate ?
for ever be lawless any more , but keep quietly the gifts of
o winter , thou art warm at heart ;
i do not know ; nor will i vainly question
and life would be all spring .
i wait without -- i may not enter in ;
nor blame thee being false -- where is thy fire ?
with which it jockey'd the nation ?
things acquainted , " replied my master to him , " only just now said
against the solar beam and sirian fire .
she has not found her man !
so gifted virtually , that in him
to sweep o'er thy waters with turbulent flight ,
from root to crowning petal , thine alone .
but , ere they closed , they flashed out proving blows
but in my time a father 's word was law ,
they froze it in a freezer that was cold as banished hope
with num'rous shafts , a fatal store . that bow
and to herself she cries ,
awaited him with many an upturned face ,
and the high presence of so fair a crew .
in magnitude and rustle shining forth
if the _ cretan _ lady had abstained from the love of _ thyestes _ ,
doth raine down - right in showres ;
while some are dreamers , harping still
a vile old good - for - nothing pimp ,
sadly the franks through the passes wound ,
ye heed no idle scorner ;
of mortal birth and body ; for whate'er
" thus soon in scholar 's cap and gown , }
all plundered from the tombs of kings .
for some green summer of the fay - land dight ,
  _ sphinx elpenor._--the caterpillars of the elephant feed on the
down to the veins of earth , thence gliding hot
by dyuers folys whiche haste them to that payne .
( he opens a volume , and applies himself to it . )
o'er the wide expanse of water ,
he spake , and indignation sank in woe .
and the great sky be mute .
the sun hath set and leaves the day ,
i 've left the old plantation ,
the beautiful lesson which our saviour taught
and had never grown in stature ,
for thou art at once the maker of the spectacle we see
upon the benches , every man in order , and unbound the
tell who taught thee all thy malice ,
on this rock o ' destiny . "
for a while to join in your westward flight ,
in his copper - banded vessel ,
so minded , have oreleapt these earthie bounds
i thenke somdiel for thi lore
indulging every momentary mood ,
from having lacked too long good food and care .
swift , and blotted from the sight .
at midnight , leaning o'er the battlement ,
for the dreamers in the vale .
this miraculous dome of god ?
of whom the cronique is so plein ,
but hush ! be silent -- i will lead the way ;
many clocks will be ticking away :
lofty rhætæum rises to the left ,
why then ask of silly man
city of chichester . to his niece elizabeth , the wife of thomas
or homicide , or poisoning .
" on this we all went inland , and eurylochus was not left behind
works under you ; and to your audit comes
and doubt more gathers on my lab'ring thought .
the waving , hazle branches , closely tied ;
in hunger and hardship and cold .
sense with keenest edge unusa"d ,
envy went knocking at his marrow - bone ,
distress was in his frequent view ,
say then , by heav'n , what blasts ye thus ?   the whilst
and since ( for grief unlocks the secret heart )
according as they more or less were laden ;
dark hollows seem to glide along and chase
wove a shroud in the day ,
that we meet so fine a household ,
to the hidden beds of iron ,
with theirs my efforts can not blend ,
saw no track of deer or rabbit ,
much did she fear , and much admire
and welcomes ev'ry bold adventurer
he breedeth a mighty bow ;
thy maker lay and wept for me :
spools ; párt , pen , páck
we saw the last embers of daylight die
let cobden cipher , and let vincent rant ,
yet thou drov'st away my gloom ,
how carols now the lusty muleteer ?
  this song , which is a juvenile production of the poet , has been
then into her eyes the tears they came ,
the apples sputtered in a row ,
dropt rustling down its shrivel'd festal dress ,
their hands and eyes , as they fought over the squire of the fleet
she was a flower -- fresh , fair and pure , and frail ;
answered wailing , answered weeping ,
to have a father who was rich and smart !
kens the pleasure , feels the rapture ,
tempt me with such affrights no more ,
" o ! " the men , " alas ! " the lasses said ,
and fast the people fell ; on ev'ry side
from their sicknesses and sorrows ;
replete with joy and wonder thus repli'd .
humanity 's great link of love ,
thou hast not made my life so sweet to me ,
someding ! feex oop der house , unt you vood still
at once thou shin'st above and shin'st below .
about the fire ?
ass moses haf not see de show . "
my mother!--at that holy name ,
we 'll go there , o'urselves from his rays to hide ,
and , meekly kneeling on the gorgeous shrine ,
are with mosque and minaret
and with willows firmly fastened ,
thou art undone.--i will make shift to rise.--
pale pink convolvulus in tendrils creep ;
what would these men , whose lives black treachery stains--
as fits the merry christmas time .
regret -- though nothing dear
we 'll take possession after dark ,
since understand ; much more his absence now
this treasure , such as i describe it to thee ,
and that the illustrious city , so renowned ,
my gallant braw john highlandman .
be careful of your sunday best !
rolls to the north the land - dividing wave ;
for ráma , sítá , lakshmaṇ , cried ,
brave allies to drive my spear into patroclus , let me , therefore ,
in a ring ;
ll . 31 - 32 . the rhyme is imperfect or shows dialectal influence .
with us beyond but with a larger stride .
into thy bitter cup when that alone
nor would you be perturbed if
in his faery bowers .
most surely i 'll die ! "
in mourning weed ;
ah ! love is not a garden - flower ,
to crave the life of my dear lord the king .
and hark ! how clear bold chanticleer ,
he himself again was smitten .
a fragrance , like that of the beautiful garden
of one who hath great loveliness ,
fields of unwithering bloom , to mortal eye
and ceases to lamp with fierce incandescence ,
the child then spake ; in his talking he to his mother said,--
" to warm my starved life in thy mightier glow .
thou shalt sleep well .
and calico - pallid faces
examining , had thus conducted me ,
" why , grandmother , what do you mean ? " cried maggie , looking up in
a deep tint to the fairest cheek ever .
" if that thou ever , lady , / need hast of my aid ,
then , gather’d , settles on the hoary deeps ;
by -- whom d'you think?--my lord of halifax
little pigs ' voices
our limbs benumm'd , ere this diurnal starr
a thing quite out of fashion .
i have crossed the ocean wave ,
and stole them all away .
with that the good knight hagan smote ortlieb the young child ;
blackbirds an ' spinks(1 ) i ca n't abide ,
and now display it in this universe ;
out of ardennes he saw a leopard stalk ,
swiftly sped across the billows ;
each tree with creeper , flower , and spray .
sir gawaine slept -- sir gawaine slept not long ,
or roasted by a sunbeam 's splendor ;
would rest like a bird an hour
risks i could not let you face .
nor all strong things had severed us then ;
upon these lines may light ,
life 's many years ,
* ynplision * , infección .
stirring the air with such an harmony ,
law and edict on us , who without law
a rich seal on the ocean 's bosom set
that the shafts can rightly lower . "
sennores , punad en fazer buenas obras ,
for vineyard apt or plow assign'd thee part
i can not tell , who loves the skeleton
with fixed opinions and sunday clothes ,
back ! cravens , back ! in ignominy fly !
to cleanse my spirit ? heart and courage fail
the queerest shape that e'er i saw ,
and bright the velvet vest
he ben full wroth , because , in soth ,
and when the battle fell away at night
but , of all recognitions , the best is that which arises from the
in thinges that be naturel ,
caribbean sea ; said to have been the first object of
but they to me are young : i gave them birth .
divided , and the light of mine burnt dim .
signa tene caedis : pullosque et lectibus aptos
as the stringed pearls , each lifted in its turn
deprived of his favourite son .
the multitude so gathered , rehearsed the event as it had come to
oh , were there such!--to lengthen out life 's hour ,
and smooth'd down his lonely pillow ,
truly generous friends , those of his may be thought ,
" voltairean ? "   so you take it ; but ' tis late ,
dear ráma king , so long delayed ,
thy cup , o my cupbearer ! contains liquid rubies ; give
' for you and him three times a - day ,
the praise of neptune 's empery .
_ adventures to the adventurous !
but peace through justice is the great ideal,--
to tame his youth , his lofty crest down goeth ,
hummed round of bees , through blossoms spilling dew,--
with larry i 've sot cheek by jowl ;
sinister window panes
and gently kissed her cheek ;
_ him and one yeoman only did he take _
whenas cherries come in place ?
the starlings on their wings are borne abroad ;
ere dawn with distant awe ; none hear the mew ,
thine is the charm , dear poesy , which sets
nature rarer uses yellow
indigestion , that conscience of every bad stomach ,
how well the bold horatius
longer like those that odysseus left behind him of old when
scratching one you will find
plus oneris , quanto veniæ minus---- _
o thou myn hele and my siknesse ,
" hey - ho ! she coms , that hath my hearte in keepe
mastered and bound your spirit unto me .
the one long war all men must know
oh cease thy course , and listen to our lay !
so i beheld united the bright school
' tis but the diff'rence of a name ,
so winga"d hermes through the heaven he sped ,
wherefore , here where thou seest , am i lost ,
( but this , of course , is just her way ,
has nothing in herself , not even love ,
but the prince has given us all the rest .
in garlands sweet your cup - so shining ,
a thousand years ago . my beautiful !
could draw the virtuous man from virtue 's way ,
till charles forgets to flow .
and they sung those hymns that smell
live in the past ; await no more
were not the paintings on the sistine ceiling
" say on , " she breathed . " what does the holy man do then ? "
and some with hands that once would shade an eye
prometheus ! from my eyes too tender ,
bang into the smalls of our backs !
þær he worna fela                   þær he worna fela
rich perfume o'er the fields.--it is the prime
for the faint fragrance and the sickly dyes
rather than others tenuous and thin ,
and the maiden thus should wander ,
such as he pleasd , and circumscrib'd thir being ?
a green - leaved sapling from the soil to tear ,
from where she sat , right through the vestibule .
_ corals _ , reddens .
his own fair daughter , lotus - eyed .
achilles , valiant as he is , the while
you that grope in my bosom shall load the ladies with rings ,
peace , peace alone can join us once again ,
into our bodies , and from our body , oft
nervous plainness in the opening of the poem !
the poet 's progress
aloft on his helm he show’d
a sunset to our fears .
fit entertainment to receive our king ,
he tells his descent from the house of hugh capet[e ] )
there , as he gazed and thought , " is this not like
crowds to the coast .      of cruel strife
holding hands ,
than the isle of delos . echo hence shall stir
" so still the diodons , amphibious tribe ,
throughout the field , i find . . .
which , beside my very threshold ,
and claim their proud birthright ;
from their warm chantry 's fold ,
and yet , o splendid ship , unhail'd and nameless ,
through the tall pines ,
adown the bearded visage , / for sad of heart in truth they were .
he loosed his ships which , by the pilots ' hands
light and laughter , joyful years ,
the one - eyed stranger was his wraith . "
daughters of earth and men , they piped of her natural brood ;
but man , more fickle , the bold license claims ,
yet the living roots remain
when the loosed storm breaks furiously ?
nor follow star - directed ways , nor tread
but also joyfull were
back to him whose hands had made it ,
nor prophylactic nor catholicon
sadly ; held out his fist , and said :
come freely to these shades of ours , —
and shadowlike seem they , and grey they appear ,
he vainly strives to wipe the crimson stain .
lay a long quiver full of arrows , some
a far , sweet sound was heard--
thou'rt sad ; thou say'st that in the halls
war alles leer .
and joy the surest path to pain ;
who shall close the blood 's wide gateway ,
they lifted then from saddle / the dame of royal state .
to - morrow morn shall see the fight renew'd ,
in which to cupide and to me
love 's voice is through your song ; above and under
the gay sash from honoria 's waist ,
" i had no intention of doing such , i do assure you . "
long stood the fair mettie and listened thereto :
far off it walks , in a bleak blown space ,
if they would chloroform me off i feel i would n't care .
from the duty of giving you something to drink ,
was plung'd , and by the skin alone was stay'd ;
sin - defiled ;
unafraid and satisfied .
" faith , " says rory , " i 'd rather love you than the ground . "
poor matthias!--found him lying
o ! the long evenings of duets and trios !
his chiere upon his child he caste ,
accomplishments to honour him with a sorry distich , in which he
i 'll fight -- and you bet it 's no sham - fight ;
and with the words a thrilling power was borne ,
they also have hearts that ache when stung .
optinui auditaeque preces : spem uota timorem
but when i sued , his grace to crave ,
oft summon spirits from the tomb 's recess ,
varied his bounty so with new delights ,
ever ready for a venture ,
then he went to sow the country ,
of greece , basked glorious in the open smiles
velut ægri somnia vanæ
clings in our memory yet .
so be it ! why be glum ?
i answer'd :   " teacher , i conclude thy words
thy mede is marked , when thou art mort :
sweet - brier , leaning on the crag
the sash , and tried
an ' lightfoot with her coaxing ways .
this said , his answer did the nymph attend ,
although thou chauntest of vnnaturall loue .
and my papa should say to me ,
nou have i of this nyhtingale ,
like the sun from a wintry sky .
the saintly sage immersed in thought profound ,
as ' twere at waning of this week
same branch that suspends and bathes it in the
helicon , and was sacred to apollo and the muses . )
yet i have felt what terrors may consort
when in the garden bare and brown
so they led him from the meadow ,
mither , mother .
shall i be the less welcome , wherever i go ,
thus he cursed it and departed :
ye shelving rocks , dark waves , and sounding shore,--
with phantom heralds challenging renown
only , only call me thine ! "
went fluttering where the hollow headlands made
consents to death , but conquers agony ,
pondering , musing in the forest ,
no child of earth , born of the sage 's will ,
their flaming crests above the waves they show ;
a bed , for solitary i must sleep ,
carefully the loaf inspected ,
and drank delicious passion from her eyes ;
and i think :   what a lucky escape i had !
it is there , my child , it is there .
in the vast , primeval forest , unremembered moons ago ,
from athos then she cross'd the swelling sea ,
served too in hastier swell to show
regained its bed to sink again to rest ,
treason has much , but we , mother , thy sons have more !
his neighbours he did not abuse ,
measure accords with the theory of linneus in respect to the
king halfdan 's jest and his laugh arose ,
when a ' other bairnies are hushed to their hame
may perchance be drowned in wuhne ,
through skilful cunning first of dwellers here below
i wonder if you long , up there in heaven ,
on the morning of christ 's nativity
if this be a sleep ,
far keener than before , the other powers
that opes the gateway of the sun .
o say what is that thing call'd light
the sequence of my song has ne'er been severed ;
that haunting me by night , by day ,
to do the hardest work on earth
for julep would not take a groat .
scorn of base things , and sdeigne of foul dishonor ;
and on my soul hung the dull weight
swelled in my green and tender bark or burst
weird - singer , or something else .
nor time nor death nor sin can overcast ,
till he shute o'er the simmer ?
but , when thessalia 's inauspicious plain
beyond a day 's supply ;
my mosses floating fold on fold !
into wild - boar of the forest ,
a more than common strength to his clear eye ,
the sweet loaf with a grateful heart ,
in my garden ,
for thou art love divine .
three miles in rings had gone , and more would go ,
and where around the overflow the reedbeds sweep and sway
fit medcines for my bodies best reliefe .
with songs of that " rough land " he loved so long and well !
his ample acres under sun or cloud ;
forth ! and god defend the right !
personality unique : for with manner anarchic
and cries " heaven save us!"--at the parson 's ass !
him ; but epicaste went to the house of the mighty jailor hades ,
“ your mother she king sigfred slew ,
to shut it after you -- but now behold
we should feel that they were winging
while his heart is so soft he a flea would not harm .
was the seed - cone of the pine - tree ,
yea , blinded and beaten with tears ,
degraded , to what wretched state reserved !
others add to it tenfold
a small cheese and a barrel o ’ beer ;
could not as yet be o'er .
who fain would ride against thee / to worms upon the rhine .
op'ning thir brazen foulds discover wide
farre distant from our fates , our fates , that mocke
' no doubt someone ' blew it ' , for everyone knew it ,
the better to excuse him in your sight .
all knew for the age 's brilliant paladin ,
green grow the rashes , o ;
that will bid the stranger welcome ;
then drops the radiant burden on the ground ;
to adorn the post of soldier ;
nor drop it carelessly ;
no wight is left , save he who slaughtered lies .
exposition in poetry of this " shakespeare of prose . "
the piper he piped on the hill - top high
with his cruel bow he laid full low
a divine work ! athens , diviner yet ,
his men he warneth by and by ,
upward again it swells ; the moonbeams show
wherever you look ,
that my first purpose fully is resum'd .
like an emigrant he wandered , seeking for the better land .
_ for the sun hammers hard and there 's never a breeze . _
we sat together at the ocean 's rim ,
is there no debt to pay , no boon to grant ?
by many an icy horn ;
puedes la palabra en flandes .
in paradise to tempt ; his snares are broke .
fragments of the precipice
from under their calm brows as brightly clear
my temples , and immerg'd me , where ' t was fit
four sorts of feet , a monosyllable and the so - called
the time shall come , when i , perhaps , may tread
when well we speak and nothing do that 's good , ii . 247 .
the nightingale forget to sing .
thou musicall _ apollo _ gau'st her hand ,
in the land of the dacotahs ,
unto our powers , by virtue of the place
this britain ! and were she to fall ,
because my fortune was so bad
freedom , hand in hand with labor ,
banquets on the circuit mess ,
for who can move when fair belinda fails ?
flash to the morn , and bannered - trumpets bray ,
he said , and to the everlasting gods
with glories to await here ,
me an ' th ' boys with pans a - washin ' cricks on old bonanza ,
seea god prood pharaoh owerthrew ,
it is the spot i came to seek--
by here hated , forcedly performs ?
dread , dread the race that still remains :
and there doth around us stand
no void place , for another dart ;
a dungeoned curse that villains wrought
and roofs of villages , on woodland crests
on a chance holiday , and scarcely then ,
wyll he nat knowe as he were nat culpable
as here to thee we dare
the countess of all - night . ' ( ' citizen of the world ' , 1762 , i.
we wander ; and no more the birth
on the right ? " " here i found them , " he answered , " when i
from each new skill .
however humble the home may be ,
around the green gravel the grass grows green ,
the point of brianchoil they passed ,
remembering our old despair ,
" yes , " said the little ducks again ,
there , lowly laid , my parents in the dust together sleep .
let her have her proud dark eyes ,
of letters which followed it , b. a. , m. d. ,
and the great , wide , open places know .
her hand and dagger streaming blood .
for i know men :   nor will ye win him back ,
which the wise alone will ponder :
half - past one , or two .   the report of small arms frequent ,
" thy will be done . "
so spake jove 's daughter , the celestial maid ,
doric pillars overlaid
then he said to hiawatha :
from thee , nor fear before thy feet to fall .
framing a face vivid and rare ,
" ' where , whenever , when , ' twere well
into the churchyard , where the graves were warm
till thou hast made the fell invader feel
lay tossed the truncheon of a bursten lance ,
before truth clear'd the mystery ,
_ come down to kew in lilac - time , in lilac - time , in lilac - time ;
laughed to think i feared a thing not so strong as i !
nor crowned with thought or aught beside ;
they trudged away from life 's broad wealds of light .
green mantle , rob'd in hue of living flame :
should not hear thy kindly counsel
or made each in the cabinet his mark
and not , like cloe , sigh !
net . postage 10 cents . half morocco , $ 4.00 net .
then was struck upon my bosom near the place the heart might be ,
þe aungeleȝ hasted þise oþ{er } & aȝly hem þratten ,
as duteous sons , our fathers were more wise .
i could n't gie up t ' lass i loved ,
kinds,--namely , letters of acceptance , and letters
spirit more brave
old robin train’d the roses red
by _ cat_enation join'd each one to one;--
i knew what ardour would thy soul inspire ,
or will there be a sort of rending sound ,
two , two only remain , whom i see not among the commanders ,
i known
and gentle , and simple , and modest , and mild ,
black trees and boughs of golden - green .
from me , and to you alone . "
to clean the cook-'ouse floor .
to shirk a debt , his wits ,
courteous will give ; nor will the gift ill suit
yet , let us not be unjust as though the civilization which has
he could well understand
" _ ari , muallama ! _ " would come a little pipe . " juntu hath a bit of
e’en the golden sun is sometimes treach’rous —
with all her train : nor is this flow'ry vale
have power to entertain so wise a man .
content , thy slaughters could amaze a god . "
and old men , lingering for memories .
it may be hard to gain , and still
is from age to age the same ,
i can not remember .   the storm - drops break on the leaves .
whom answer'd agamemnon , king of men :
speaking to the bear these measures :
whose cough embolden'd ( as the story holds )
which whimpered,--"oh ! oh ! oh !
saying : " willows , close around ,
this nossis saith . and only they the cyprian loves may know
their custom'd mourning .   never in my breast
alas ! if i forsake these gorgeous spoils ,
though not from copse , or heath , or cairn ,
( your rhymer so hopelessly loose is ! )
no , but resolutely turned ,
through deserts , frozen dry ,
while he could stammer
the distant roaring of the lions hear .
rose up and clad himself , and took his spear .
" o me ! what is it , master , that i see ?
for maybe , while wasting my taper ,
the brand discharged by him , hit either brow ,
twenty years . but cease your sighing and lamentation -- we have no
i look upon the peopled desert past ,
in which the tongue , though but a member small ,
from the temples of our living , all empurpled with thy giving ,
cease to be .
imperial wonders raised on nations spoiled ,
never the least stir made the listeners ,
in fear 's surprise
where first you spread your golden wings
_ haivers _ , nonsense , speaking without thought .
hastened to a neighboring island ,
when he is washed and dried .
who saved from a ruthless foe
tear the peasants to the rhine .
not handsomer can rub the skin
and now the goal is gained , they bind
ours did not .   he that seeks a grace beyond ,
deftly plied his skillful fingers
afraid the old man will fail to nest out the fact
an ' rot the dyvors i ' the jails !
and all those tales imperishably stored
now full in view the creature stood
with emerald overflowing , waste on waste
' tis loving mary magdalene
the slimy snail , and bloated lizard crawl ;
of orange seed ; the mist leans from the hill ,
of ice , far up on a mountain head .
she bent the pin and broke the needle 's top
and who are you , " true thomas said ,
appreciate the fact , that , whenever brother jonathan seems
for the women of earth , in the ranks of mankind
my o'ertoil'd sinews slacken .   we had reach'd
but wait a bit ; to - morrow they will blindly look aside ;
but the moonshee wrinkled his long thin eyes ,
shrinks from the dim abyss , yet dare not venture back ,
the sequel each of parting and of fight :
he , save his hope deceived him and was vain ,
whence hopes and fears with helpless eyes ,
fortune to the owners of the garden in which it
gleg as tam o'shanter 's ' meg ' !
the vulture on a lofty tree .
they bade that from the minster / he to the grave be borne .
law , order , knowledge , art , from high ,
till all the coward thoughts of death gave way . "
of swift absyrtus foaming to the main
" but now another path runs traverse before thine eyes , such that
" take back the virgin page "   thomas moore
here then , my sons , is all your living hope ,
in all our friendless wanderings -- in homeless penury--
and , stain'd with lover 's blood , in pendent rows ,
and old silenus , youthful in decay ,
the shepherds at these tidings
" --this man is agamemnon ,
could tears prevail , could pity move ,
by favourable breezes fanned ,
and tho ' your liberals , nimble as fleas ,
with festal viands , and associates gay ,
or common coal , or naphtha -- would to heaven
everywhere i look i see--
entice him once to listen to their songs ;
so we must certify the skill ' e 's shown
of your unbridled and cyclonic staves !
then we give 'em quarter -- such as ' adn't up and cut ,
that stronger marks of athenian manufacture should not remain .
reply , reply .
the vigour of the rounded limb .
flattered the sinking orb with faces bright .
have no device left now to save myself
and whiter grows the foam ,
to some great good . where'er a daisy grows
all glorious that it lifts aloof ,
declare what guilt is on this circle purg'd .
his little lonely cabin on the hill .
of seven unequal reeds . while love engag'd
can e'er again profane it -- it is free
high o’er the hill - tops moans the wild breezes ,
i hear his cheering notes at early dawn--
to bear his armour ? shall we fast , or dine ?
" oh , tell me , sailor , tell me true ,
the servant of the lord of paradise
thy feet the waters lave ,
an ' now -- i know but little joy :
or a tree in my wood , at the thick of the boughs .
who sey ever or this so dul a man ? "
grow soft and calm , and temper their bold heat .
' twould surely turn " old nick " blue
tresses , that wear
a nobler rome , a rome unbound and free ,
from the lawns where roses grow ,
with tender nourishment replete .
but there 's nae hand can loose my band
my lad was workin ' with his team , as only
more greedy of our will ?
let the wind shake our flag like a feather ,
if the matches be taken away from us and put out of reach
" is it towards sorrow or towards joy you lift
seems the stroking of a dear
less dull than thou , will hide with mantling flowers
each gazer drank ; and deeper drank more near :
reluctant leaving scenes so blest ?
throwing myself on the sand , confronting the waves ,
one springs from out the dew - wet grass ;
where revel calls , and laughter , vainly loud ,
but we could n't leave him loose , not in europe anywhere ,
and lift me from the drowsy deep ...
the woods of lithuania i would tread
all the names i know from nurse :
gave warning that the sun was nigh .
a wild dahkotah war - whoop rang
i know not how ye came into my womb ;
and call’d by joking _ tritons _ , _ homer _ ’s tomb :
and girt the star , and hov'ring round it wheel'd .
dis life ish boot a passin from
the warm south - west awakes ,
and peeped in an attic , where ,
and the youngest sate on her knee .
but thou must sleep , like them , to know
that curse which europe scorns to bear ?
" pilgrim , " spoke the angel sweetly ,
these doting sires , those striplings bold in sin .
i will not stain my life with such a blot .
brief was the span of all whom that fierce maid
and thereto sing full clear .
a chamber got , close , secret , near his own ;
withstand her : when all inwardly the maddening serpent 's ill
before mary of magdala came , _ edwin markham _ , 270 .
with honour , as the laws decree ,
_ it is the spring - tide now !
watched him floating , rising , sinking ,
v. 59 .   the dame . ]   his godmother 's dream was , that he had one
as the zephyr that rustles a leaf ,
helios traversed the city streets
brighter than gold , purer than silver sheen ,
in _ life _ is god 's best revelation .
( 6 )   " hawart " is perhaps identical with the saxon duke hadugot ,
swords clash with swords , on horses horses rush ,
the servile spanish rulers . he is best known by the ode
of all days you have chosen this one to visit my garden .
to many a man , to many a knight ,
my uncle ephraim was a man who did not live in vain ,
like gods , would bid their slaves adore ;
there lofty hills their range display ,
but it was too late.--the ruse had succeeded ,
their snow so silently and softly down
and their hound , and their horse , and their love , and their eyes
three times had the circle traced ,
the dripping south . already had my steps ,
send a snow - fall high as heaven ,
i beare a sword upon my theigh ,
my rescued sailor shares the fire with me ! ’
a baby there
next he bewails pasiphae ( hapless dame ! )
just look at that lovely emeu ! "
and in the midst , ' mong thousand heraldries ,
" comme bien " for his wares ;
still seeking what i sought when but a boy ,
and the sobbing of the young greek .
him in this strange disguise she from the cell
these acts of hateful strife , hateful to all ,
with france .
to the voices out of the dark,--
of seamen , and stout galley - rowers ' toil :
as if her pulses beat by book--
rouse souls from slumber , into thoughts of heaven .
you understand ,
their aid intreats , and calls on each by name :
help'd of heaven , to bind up the broken of heart .
full of sweet breathings was the air ,
found utterance none . yet even so distress'd ,
to the memory of a lady , iii . 403 ;
i find expression for my thought
nor need we now ask any more ,
the rattling chariots clash , the torches glare .
this little cow eats grass ,
he made the myrtle shake and foliage fall ,
i have shattered many idols out along the dusty track ,
and there 's a fierceness in his ire--
who have once reined in their steeds at any shrine ,
i see the heroes at other toils ,
trinacrian trembleth murmuring , and heaven is smoke - clad o'er .
as in the days of old .
the heaven that christian dogs desire --
whose love of either to myself was nearer ?
in the verdant garden ,
upheaved in broken cliffs and airy peaks ,
tells us the day himself 's not far ;
as though fore - telling e’r they should returne ,
drug that he may cast it into the bowl and make an end of
i 'll be the parson .
the lost , that in armies wept over your funeral pall ?
the band struck up with " killaloe " ,
after i this had all from me unloosed ,
thy children , withering ; and something ,
while , present to the view , by fancy brought ,
we determined to bring up her three little nestlings ourselves
as a hero had worship'd -- vile treacherous thing--
and wave on wave in long succession follows ;
and closed for aye the sparkling glance
singing he wiped the tears from his eyes , uncovered his face ,
there were thieves from the danube and rogues from the don ;
or good roast beef , best suits a child ;
set quasi poeta , tabulas quom cepit sibi ,
step , step , step , we ne'er shall part ,
but by that health , i 've got a share o't ,
from off their master 's table ; and he turned ,
and it was sharper than diamond - stone ,
be it health or be it leisure , 57 .
this be our part , for so we serve you best ,
and ' twas to tame an afghan pride nor hell nor heaven could bind ,
make thee to shudder , and grow sick at heart;--
but i , why should i there presume ?   or who
this to consider , there 's , alas ! no hurry .
your manly hearts shall glow ,
which with compassion had their arrows barbed ,
with thine arrows tipped with lightning ,
all souls find sailing - room .
many a maid of many a maiden took leave with many a tear .
the sinner 's pardon and the iust man 's peace .
sad memory with thy songs to interfuse ?
most , and the people of the warrior king .
_ for young king erik erikson _ .
" their champion ; see the great orodes slain ! "
and i refused to bow the knee .
did that high courtesy ; which can by none ,
yet cloak thou art soon shorten'd , for that time ,
completely " quant . suff . "
" we 'll visit miss beffin to - morrow , and then
but failed again , again , confused
among these maidens there was one
uncuirassed , nor in other arms arrayed ;
but greeks ; if not by birth , yet greeks by custom .
in a diphthong consisting of a strong and a weak vowel
vict .   in truth , a pretty song .
we leave ye with your bondmen , to wrestle , while ye can ,
long and slow ( and yet they will go
earth gave her chosen men of strength
high are her ramparts , strong and vast ,
beside the fire - reflecting waves , forlorn ,
full more than thousand splendours towards us ,
that dripped with melancholy gold :
who plant amidst this heathen wilderness
the lonely mountains o'er ,
i have kill'd him -- but i loved him -- my dear son .
beheld the armament of austria flow
strength and heedless beauty cowed ;
when that the four great english horsemen bore
i clasped her to my bosom !
as lavender makes sweet the air
to you , my lad .
eet ees too late !
come when the leaf comes , angle with me ,
come , face to face , and slay me if you will ,
i slip into the milk - warm water
barbara frietchie 's work is o'er ,
two outcast men we were :
and life has grown dull on the station ,
for old cerambus ' strange adventure known :
_ yet bring i to my work an eager joy ,
" hear me , trojans and achaeans , that i may speak even as i am
yea , all these things , and more than i can tell ,
and modelled it within with wood and clay ;
while one on avalanche did chase .
fortune the faction of the moor forsakes .
good lord , if nick should bomb the walls
stronger and gayer tenfold!--but , o friends ,
nisus , euryalus , and turnus fell .
await their fate . and now the dawn is nigh .
to the green - vista'd gladness of the past
our waste brings want upon our children 's heads .
thus -- till another autumn 's glow
thy ways are free
oh , i 'm lost ! undone for ever -- helpless in the wild wood left ;
which yorke obayes , and vp king henry comes ,
in this garden alley may
swam like a feverish wine exultant tost
then through the safest gate you 'll enter
o'er valley and o'er hill ,
grounds of popularity of roman tragedy
od drat , who cares fer kings or queens ,
and that his dear son living / might nevermore by him be seen .
how thou art come into a happy land?--
finds tongues in trees , books in the running brooks ,
some lost , some stolen , some as relics kept .
only when the candle was lit
high and higher still they go ,
with slaught'ring guns th ' unwearied fowler roves ,
of the spheres conjoint ;
" arrah , kathleen , my darlint , you 've teas'd me enough ,
then the neatherd made answer , saying :
like the pale cup of the sea ,
predicting themis , then oraculous deem'd .
jes ' _ a - thinkin ' _ how cold then
if you will join the dixie band , etc .
him thenkth that he is noght relieved ,
for shippes ashore beyond the scorpe ,
and touched with circling moonbeams , silver white
down the slopes of the shoreward way ; -
with never a touch of splintered wood .
impress'd on the white road , in the same line ,
or of th ' eternal coeternal beam
the end she deemed that it would be best for her to go to ida and
wi ' luck to fix oor fee !
the poet 's laurel crown ,
those rites are o’er , the steed is slain ;
how i , in lonely nights , should lie awake ,
kintraside , countryside .
as if a voice within him cried , " beware
but he conscious seem'd not , for ' twas always his way
but , when i think o ' the bonnie braes o ' menstrie ,
glitt'ring spears by some are wielded ,
what , oh thou frivolous god ! twofold thy measure of time ?
why did you slay me ? i 'd done no wrong . i 'd ha '
the joyous bells were ringing wide
not once or twice in our fair island - story ,
shouts on his voyage with black and baltimore :
throughout his measles and his chincough ,
" soldier , soldier come from the wars ,
answer made the son of pohja ,
children grew to kings and sages .
and a new boat to construct him .
without their convoy faith may quail
who rush to meet with him in agony ,
speaks , and white moons wake ,
and painful sweat from all his members flows .
disgrace his bright habiliments of war .
says i , " and so he sleeps below ,
and melancholy , silent maid ,
for , that his æneids missed their threatened fate ,
heavenly truth , as intercessors to obtain for their votaries the
they can not brook to wear the yoke ,
stood near the wall to see at play
let the wine unsparing run !
within it children and grandchildren to the fifth generation ;
as sudden ruin yawned around ,
we seek bruin 's shaggy hide .
the boundaries not to be o'erstepp'd by man
beyond the grave , there stood his secret thought .
he placed the crown on dacey 's head
introduced into greece the principles of philosophy . tatian will
by thee protected with our naked soles ,
offspring of eternity ,
then day and night he watched her , and bestowed
beset , and keenly press'd , than thought of him
soothing and gentle as a mother 's kiss ,
then , dizzily , she sank upon the floor ,
of minor faults , of coloring tame and cold--
is in skinnin ' that same old coon , " sez he .
nor the country people slumbered ,
for number or proportion . mockingly ,
with " i have saved this afternoon for you " ;
' tis hard to write , but harder to forbear .
angels , or more , on either hand are nigh ,
give , by thy powers , that airy shapes controul ,
here they trysted , here they strayed ,
on ground quhile they grone .
ulysses , whom the king alcinoüs
hark away ! hark away to the spoils !
every lip is now compressed ,
he spread those sheets -- the funny boy--
and their sunlight is his grace .
but just as we were getting full
and lionâlet not me my lion see
will turn it silver - gray ;
had need from head to foot well understand ;
tow'rds thee , who usest such nice subtlety ,
and glorious dust that goes to dust ,
slight but select , and just enough to express ,
reeled , staggered , righted , and then headlong plunged
and lifts her leafy arms to pray ;
we from the bridge descended at its head ,
no wonder now you would have stayed ,
on victory 's muster - roll ;
like a dancer in the fair ,
lest , by chance , some breezy nursemaid
i have lain biting my cheeks
the old , old king of cumberland
of christ , and all the harvest reap'd at length
the babe had fallen , and a quadroon girl
for troy , for all the ruin she foreknew .
when he had thus said the erinyes stayed his speech , and achilles
sir william barnes , of woolwich , whose only daughter and heir ,
even all that they would . for lo ! i will tell thee and do
never to submit or falter !
the weeping sailors ; nor less fierce their joy
whom ye in goodly seates may placed see ,
lone on the fir - branch , his rattle - note unvaried ,
my crystal halls ring clear
although those old men shared the happiness
and thou shalt lie as irus lies , one obol all thy store ,
were strong as sin , and white as sin forgiven ;
a slave , with slaves his monarch 's throne he raised ,
no go -- by land or ocean--
more dark and strange thy veilèd agony ,
and bade them keep it for her memory .
in the silver beards of the old and the hair of women slain .
raucous and rusty
ye shall brighten past the angels ,
so past , and past the stone - heap white
the rich , fragrant gums fall from branches to deck ,
see a new teacher , etc .
and freely drink , committing all thy cares
de sus versos bien puede hacer un sayo .
you can brag all you like of your fashions ,
both in fortune 's sunshine bright ,
and us , way - wearied wanderers , the while to stand permit .
never yet could any steed
" and this seraphic ocean - child
but till my time be come that i be dead
de gonzalo gustos hijo ,
make use of ev'ry friend and ev'ry foe .
o slowly , slowly raise she up ,
away from thy lonely dwelling fly !
breathing fiery fogs and vapors ,
with labour light is friendship gained ,
" nevermore shall i awaken
shadowless , reft of rain and dew ,
“ once least of all my manly sons , erst given
it chanced to be too a sabbath day
with colors blurred together ,
so little am i acquainted with the words and manners of the more
a writ against that " vagrant " ?
others , like witold , dwell among you here .
and speak half - whispering , as in fear ;
lo ! in the moonlight gleams a marble white ,
most generous , most gentle , most discreet ,
it breathed of him and blush'd with wine !
so once i dreamed . so idle was my mood ;
he passes by it every day as certain as can be--
and coxswains damned us , dancing , banking stroke ,
july 6 .     arrive lisbon . ( stanzas xvi . , xvii . letter 126 . )
along the ' horizon , and the wain lies all
o pitiless and uncompassionate !
making the honour'd extract full
the alien horns which nodded o'er his brow ;
und durch die stille braust das meer
and then the voice of blame found vent ,
the keenness of my sight .   but not the soul ,
fought sadly , with bereaved indignant eyes ,
to ráma gives the power and might .
sicknesse , and sorrow , whose pale lidds ne're know
the only sunrise that mine eyelids crave ;
the maiden 's gown was worset guid ,
how ' tis that , while the seeds of things are all
that joppan leper 's ease was pain . "----
in size to great superior .
lops the heads off all the adders ,
and set him up a deity ;
now sleeping in these peaceful groves .
toothless dame of dismal northland ,
and find some island far from all the world ;
the night was brief , rich , beautiful , and strange
to boundless vengeance the wide realm be given ,
far off , are ' gainst each other fighting .
evidently multiplied .
so , my autumn , let me kneel
rhesus and rhodius then unite their rills ,
with personal act or speech,--nor ever cull
accomplish is accomplish'd , is it not ?
from the wreck of hopes far - scattered ,
the shoally water : with them went saticula 's fierce band ,
though a girl may fondly love a living gent , as many do--
when the glad soul is full to overflow ,
the leaguered fort to keep her faith is used ;
plainly put , his more or less
when withered is the guardian flower ,
copartner in these regions of the world ,
envie , tho began travaile
there they grant a new diploma
and if he once , by shame oppress'd ,
that open in life 's mouldering wall
talia dicentem genitor dulcedine laeta
as birds see not the casement for the sky ?
it wears an altered face
convulsively to escape . { 153 } as for the shirt that he wore next
my heart is given to love that 's sanctified ,
“ wrought i for this in elis ? at the lake
what if the rose should bloom ,
which having served us , perish , we are held
more skilled in scrip than scripture use ;
no weariness , no storms of sea or air ,
being taken by force out of a monastery where she had professed ,
that from the deep in windings pass
he liked to watch the sunlight fall
surely it will not be my doom
he , taking marcus by the hand , yet here
wha kills me wi ' disdaining .
little thoughtful creatures sit
my _ first _ the driver wields ;
like death out of the north ;
tiera poised his mighty javelin ,
( a - muse - meant t'invoke when miss truth we would cheat her ) ,
who led her youth with flocks upon the plain .
if beuk wo nt do't , then jockey shoot ,
her words the troubled bosom soothe .
peace , freedom , wealth ! no fairer view ,
texere docta liga strophio ,
and through his gen'rals wounds his own doome speakes ,
the arrow flew in vain ,
for sothe soche a zeman as he is on
the beggar is taxed for a corner to die in ,
the fragments of the lighten'd tray ,
i wonder if that gardener hears
how repentant poor frank was at last .
so long as the red spurt follows the steel .
sometimes imperial robes i wear ,
till , guided by mine ear , i found the place
w{i}t{h } her vn - worþelych werk me wlateȝ w{i}t{h}-i{n}ne ,
he breathed , it piped ; he moved , it rose to fly :
in his good time , when all your dears are dead ,
with deeds that others had done ,
nevermore his lips repeat
to these adieu !
and that ' tis sacrilege for men to shake
i became an englishman .
a stranger chanced to stroll that way;--
give me the shores and wharves heavy - fringed with black ships !
ole marster 's pride , an ' make him sw'ar ,
words that are like a blue - white flame .
above alle othre ayein this vice
the tee , the start of youth -- the game , our life--
he knows how to behave ;
this is the level - coil that buggins keeps .
effrontery never fails him .
proud in the boon which brahmá gave ,
go -- go -- tho ' worlds were thine ,
` for other thought nor other dede also
and were stirred the pots of porridges ,
and they too , have been riven .
with al his herte and most it hateth .
and when this boon rewards the dead ,
it must have come from ik marvel himself , god bless him !   i
but little he 'll reck , if they let him sleep on
he squinted so cross , ' twas as much as she could
live blindly and upon the hour .   the lord ,
dead , i cut the throats of the two sheep and let the blood run
else we may flye ; thou to a tree mayst clyme ,
lo ! the vila of the mountain sends one ,
on me deriv'd , yet i shall temper so
which bellows as the sea does in a tempest ,
when it chirped in his ear , he was smitten with fear ,
felix elysii tenes in oris ,
a wearied man and old ,
the visitant neither turned nor stirred .
o son of man , take heed
" thus having pass'd the night in fruitless pain ,
oh ! then will the exile return !
waxed ever mightier till the eventide ,
the savage old father bear cried ,
as there they saw the avenging ships of spain ,
sealed with a sharp thorn , was received by his friend mary . ]
besides , in the sky the little birds fly ,
" thy tears are at the wind 's will borne away .
why -- heaven forbid we should repine!--
and thickets whence the water fell
always first they praise the heroes ,
voice of her utterance was stayed . and at the last she
por echarte de sí con sobresalto ,
haunting the gate of the
where late the shepherd told his tender tale ;
as he saw that the river ran broad and high ,
my lyre is but attuned to tears and pain ,
but , soft ' n ' sentimental , when the long , cold
" he would not fly the rovers ' flag -- the bloody or the black ,
thus from dawn to dark i wait , i learn
in reprobation of the barbarous age ? "
so may the god reverse his purposed will ,
light of his life , and guides his brazen spear
restless he pondered still
the little lake is smooth as glass
till , roll’d between the banks , it lies the food
there is home a sable filly
comes now the moth - white moon !
the archbishop lie ; gush from the gaping wounds
miserable old beggar , leaning on his staff and with his clothes
her white arms nestled amid her furs ;
heard all that johnny said ,
like the shouting of a backstay in a gale .
in euentyde in - to þe vyne i come ,
" there 's gowd in the breast " james hogg
or what a deed of blood some high - day , when the summer[v]hath
and thro ' the well - wrought breastplate drove its way ;
oh what a privilege it is to know
another on the roof ;
come , dear children , come away down ;
shall a wider world command .
however noble the committer be ,
burned like a fever in their blood ,
either to food or love ? yet love is good ,
some small repose his fainting spirits take ;
inspire thy mind to make thy challenge good ! "
my study , flanked with ivied fir
and elatreus in weight - throwing , and in boxing laodamas ,
they 're richer who diminish their desires ,
thus have i made this wreath of mine ,
he tried to shift his position ;
and died among the roses of the spring .
lighting a paper cigar with flint and steel .
gray - haired senior of the firm , down to the pink-
ayre hated earth , and water hated fyre ,
i with this sword to - day will pierce my breast .
where beams of warm imagination play ,
that i should no longer stay ;
leapt our minerva from a mortal brain .
and among the clouds disport thee ,
the loftiest ,
" when malik shah determined to reform the calendar , omar was
( fly away , my heart , fly away )
where a stone mullion its carved apex rears .
national songs and poems , and by his profound enthusiasm for the
who knows how it be wise or rash
changed to a firmament - riding earthless essence
nothing of europe here ,
what meschief bakbitinge doth
things flown and fled ?
a gracious prince sits in that shay
the worlde shall passe : ye and all ioy mundayne
( but grampa says that that 's the way " baptizo " is explained . )
" go tak the mone ther it sit , "
quick the young lads from the village
on the roses of passion is lying ;
and some make pretty nurses:--
which i had made , and mother tried
the kittens they pulled the little mouse down ,
" such are the men who , with instinctive dread ,
yet in the very centre , past all price ,
and when i tried to drive him -- well ,
and so i 'm sitting on the bench , my spirits sort o ' low ,
the brave man 's colour changes not ; no fear
the mother heard it under the mould .
with poems groan'd the royal press ,
  " thou shalt no more be termed forsaken . "--_isaiah _ , lxii . 4 .
where frustrate souls like mine may dwell ,
sea - current 's eddying ring .
distinguishment unseen , design unlawed .
to make a silent and safe retreat . "
some town , encompass'd round with hostile bands ,
life be the queen ,
lincoln and garfield , now henceforth to be
sends up its smoky curls ,
perched upon the women 's castle ,
" but wait a bit , " the oysters cried ,
" draw from the town , my songs , draw daphnis home .
and all thy week - day darkness blend
he longed to climb the mountain height .
had him requited with such treachery :
where streams of living water flow
deafen'd by his own stir
the dropping head first tumbled on the plain .
as we , dear girl , are sitting here ,
winding down to arcady ?
in their cold ships , are clad in shreds ;
damag’d hopes and pinafores too .
" wow ! bow , wow , wow ! " barked some dog , a little way off .
her stores were opened , and this firmament
or in that little room upstair'd so high ,
a strenuous family dusted from its hands
and forth withal unto cupide
evolved spontaneous ; hails with tenant trump
whom love enclouds . nor soul - piercing nor keen
ae wife says " saut butter , " ane " sugar o ' leed , "
in their solicitude for me ;
to the place where mary lies ;
and branches like a tree .
your silent step must wake across the hall ;
the grass that summer thrills ,
and who his rival can in arms subdue ,
as if stars , flowers , and all things bright
a slight wind shakes the seed - pods--
from scorn i beg of thee ,
and frost will blight the fairest flowers ,
aeons ago .
and , when lulls the wind , safe anchorage find
a timeless trance .
the moon , half - shadowed , trailed its silver robe
when the chorus of colors came over the
sit here by my side ,
with cocoanuts from zanzibar ,
i shall laugh and hug me , hearing how his sentinels declare ,
because of the moonlight on my bed .
non feret usque suum te propter flere clientem :
flinch not from the path thy fathers trod ,
in bitter grief henceforward shall i reign ,
and all thank god with their warming wits ,
that i , prosaic , rather hate your
the triumph or the tomb .
and hailed the gods that light the morn
but thou didst promise this , and all was well .
and all that sort of thing -- of which
see where yon simple fences meet ,
the world for which we sighed is with us now ;
the same is kept of god who taketh heed
when one is full , and rises high ,
as ye declare ( for so shall ye impart
he calls home my soul from dying ;
the dripping never stops .
was e'er so soft , or half so sweet , as his .
and in the minds of many , that mr . clark was somewhat given to
to david , stablisht as the dayes of heav'n .
saying : the son of man must be delivered
where the fiends of battle leaped ,
tho ' close as ' twere their souls ' embrace .
bless you ! " my lovie . "
ignoring secrets in the midnight 's breast .
or that god soften at a mortal 's grief !
who is chosen for the maiden ’s bridegroom ? ”
though few for that surpass ye , o !
he threw down the gates with a noise like judgment .
dull - eyed despondence , palsying nerveless hands .
he straight across the water ' gan call with all his might ,
the hills with snow are white .
and cupid at my heart ,
and ever , far receding ,
and then his piteous tale of sorrow said ,
the drones afar . the busy work each plies ,
-- if for the first and second labour meet --
and unspent all that time
within these covers to thy feet
a strong , brief struggle , and now all is o'er !
on a proposed negotiation , iii . 226 ;
keep our spirit stomachs fed .
when we are dead , beyond the setting suns ,
for the perfect sweetness of her flower - like face ;
there told in artless verse his tender pain
is to wait some indefinite crisis,--
may the hours we spend in singing ,
margaretta -- ever thine ! "
a morning full of happiness any boy may find
then said the queen
and beckoning to me with her dimpled hand .
but speak , and question him , if more may please thee . "
peril and pain and death !
and uses the whole of his block for the bust ,
and strikes the ever - deep'ning tones ,
the awkward squad , and could afford to squander
willingly die there .
then too when angel voices sung
surely the stoutest battle between two
and with brave lords and gentlemen
and my true - love lay upon mine arm
and be as if thou hadst not been .
her arms like foam upon the flowing tide ;
whose raptures fire me , and whose visions bless ,
and with his wings fanning it as it grew .
unconscious , causing sorrows -- higher aims--
as the old impulse flies to heaven or hell . "
who loved a lass at home ;
we from our hard night of slumbers
in its wreaths as before ,
song , " follow a shadow , it
its pathos : the girl 's love for him ; how , half slain
and as i passed a greybeard said , ' here used to stand of old
sincere affection prompts my speech :
et nati natorum et qui nascentur ab illis(497 ) .
o utinam memores ipse cohorsque mei !
and keep close to the shepherd ; but so few ,
and through golden horns , to greet you ,
i came , not hoping ; and , like one
makes the dry wood creak .
and i said , " what is written , sweet sister ,
twelve judges each in sable armour clad ;
substantially express'd , and in his face
that ye woudna waken me frae sleep
out of the choir of planets blots
of the forest at last open'd sharp , o'er the fork
cease , likewise , the cause of woe .
took up the second letter :
or in their tyrant - minions vest the power ;
to teach philosophers the thirst of thieves :
' ah ! see , the unsightly slime , and sluggish pool ,
recurs in almost all savage mythologies , and i have made the
ere the merciful numbness stole his brain ;
to their notes . "
of circe slept , apart from all the rest .
their fury being spent by its own shock ,
a crowd in france amusing:--
we were a little distant from it still ,
the muses with their dulcet quills .
as she has been , long may she reign ,
and arabia 's martial flower ,
and not till thou have sugar'd shã­rã­n 's lip
a vision hovering on a sea of fire ,
in one of caesar 's galleys ; that we bore
earth waits , and patient heaven ,
for , kind and fair as she might be ,
glad , holpen , shall i send you forth and stay you with my store .
imperiously made all beneath him feel
for slaughterless wars i beat the drum ,
the escutcheoned hearse , lit every leaf distinct
and cuffed the blossom from the blossoming quince ;
commentators seem to be in their understanding of browning
and , like the rootless stubble , tost
and ecchos multiply the sound !
en átomos leves
vain are your masses too .
the threshold of her cottage ; then i turned ,
for which no lenger mighte she restreyne
bot i am drecched to the fulle
if her declining graces shine so bright ,
thee , who hast wooed me for thy sire , my daughter for thy bride ?
i love her , i love her , i love her ,
a tree on which the host of dreams
take all the law will spare ! "
" blow , blow , " i cry , " in vain you rouse the sea ,
have other counsel than they :
till charles made good at last the weekly wage ;
awak'd , amaz'd , confus'd with transport glows ,
reclining on thy breast , giving myself to thee ,
the soul distressing words they say .
they 'll take their refuge in the thought that mind
where simple art with bounteous nature vied ,
_ and rānī lakshmī devī his wife ! _
have said of leslie and of long ....
( were it more or lesse ) which they did keepe .
thy words intolerably keen .
and ferst he let the prestes take ,
just a boy who answered when he heard his country 's
infuriate , indiscriminate in ill ,
the woman 's province ; ply the distaff , spin
and i can see their eyes with blood - lust shine ;
brush'd by the hand of rough mischance ,
" here is the steed that saved the day ,
“ delight ; nay let him galatea please ,
still tending left the further we had gone .
whence i my vision , clearer shall before ,
strange , as when vaguely through the autumn haze
like andrew beating on his drum .
while i gaze , oh fields that rest after harvest ,
a little time for laughter ,
triumphant over shipwreck and all storms .
" shall we our weary steps address ,
or wintry hail before the driving blast
that glories most in mortall miseries ,
than for estates , lerned men , or eloquent . "
over his prostrate form
for their daily dole of food
the years move on , and abraham lincoln , the great commoner , dear
then take thine own with thee ! thy coldness is warm
and sinful yet must be ;
tho ' keen reproach the man assail .
his lance uplifting , wounded overhand
into the narrow circuit of your walls .
unnoticed , as amidst the people 's cries
with murmurs , whom they trust and love ?
how could countries be in this ?
he wakes , who never thought to wake again ,
said they were hypocrites who made long prayers ,
l'air francs et sages
and profreth thaise forto selle .
to succour , should i need .
o make me glad for every scalding tear ,
within this wood , out of a rocke did rise
" come , pray with me , my seraph love ,
hoping still to find the daughter
the glorious title of a virgin 's name ?
' what gars ye rin sae still ? '
facta cypridis de cruore deque amoris osculis
in the star - blurred hours of the night
away from god that holds himself away --
was thanne glad of that is falle ,
then answered the queen the little foot page ,
and dearest to her father . on her face
the querulous cry of every gabbling goose
great solyman gainst godfrey took the field ;
whom man or devil can not tire ,
her watering teeth the dimpled apple traced
i can but know thee as my star ,
lawless as i , sweeps through the radiant air !
the dreamful mine
like a great lady -- one that is used to rule
neither one could prove the victor ;
brings us again to our homes from the unknown land of our exile ,
and lips of fear ,
is in thy secret soul abhorred .
see first that you 're properly _ dressed _ . "
" one boon ( if vanquished foe may crave
or what can be the reason that he 's so long away ? '
for him , when at his birth his thread of life
for the foam - flowers endure when the rose - blossoms wither ,
came one in royal robes and all the pride
but ' tis no great matter these men to serve so ,
before i accept your kind offer . "
and thou , treble - dated crow ,
and like on a strong - wing'd eagle then
the bank may fail , the ram is hardly dry :
strikes them and flings them under , while their tasks
till kindling on thy wonder 's verge
from the suns beam meet night , her other part
once moved ? what woe , or what delight ,
carousing -- at those that raised dust to soil thy robe , o
and all the birds were quiet
nor glanced to either side .
joseph to his brethren .
abstracted and solemn , in manner a clown ,
" pray rat gnaw rope , rope wo n't hang butcher ,
i'se ne'er ride horse nor hizzie mair ;
like the vague trouble of a transient dream,--
and from th ' attacks of wrinkling age ,
in the slow silence of the autumn 's drouth .
oratorios of beethoven , handel , or haydn ,
and pale dawn stole in silence through his cell ;
upon the purple sea - line leaned
there was an old man in a boat ,
" _ small wonder she receives a shock each time she views
whence in waves her hair outrolled ,
of what the lord will do ;
can a creature , so excelling ,
with might across the river / his oar the boatman plied ,
they prick a bleeding heart at every stitch .
hidden away in the heart of me ,
for wherever they 're lying , in cupboard or shelf ,
my gentle star , or something better gave me ,
to you , like him , no prospect nature yields ,
had prest upon him ; and old michael now
of hedrick 's realistic art ; and i yet recall him at the
wonderful art in the air ?
her mute companion as it lay
still i knew your heart was near me ,
led over hill and dale .
a space i look'd around , then at my feet
driv'n headlong from the pitch of heaven , down
as if he passed an altar , where the host
and crushed by woe , of thee bereaved ,
wait but a little while--
" a flirt " is a jibe or jeer .   ' he would sometimes ... cast out a
and in glenmuir 's wild solitudes , lengthen'd and deep ,
like a sad widow drowned in tears ,
for him there is no mystery in the mould ,
rest at last ; till we shall come
have mov'd me to the blazon of a peer
_ tsuya - ko _          " the lustrous,"--shining , glossy .
fal - de - ral , fal - de - ral , daddle - i - day .
arose , and opening wide his beak ,
of sorrow in the rain - lashed plains and skies ,
all round about his royal chair
smolderande , smouldering , smothering , b. 955 .
ere yet within the door .
on the verse of the _ brut _ see above , p. 119 .
shepherd 's dog and wolf
then answered regin the guileful : " the deed is ready to hand ,
and him lof singan            _ laude perenne _
glazed with a flashy luster
" that 's droll , " says mcphun ; " ye've jist speakit ma mind .
devouring time , blunt thou the lion 's paws ,
but surer far of much that we forget
volleying out of the glen , they leapt up ,
without my love , not a ' the charms
and fondly in his arms he took
to the joy of all the virgins ,
which now with god is in debat :
where with his wife he late had converse held ;
rose straightway for his friend a feeling of hope in his bosom ,
thee , too , lucerne , the crumbling furrows then
as unto others his , no sense contain . '
poet , the poet of gods and heroes , did indeed inherit some
they also led me from a virtuous wife ,
to be well changed for war .
above - ground -- or below ?
and lose you quite .
this prayer at least the gods fulfill--
  text from the 1815 edition .
obey no wand but pleasure 's .
justice for their wrongs,--
who for yourselves so little care ! "
stood on the fence , flung up her arms and crowed ,
in a small rainy corner stands
but winter kills the orange - buds ,
and sheep - walks where the curlews cry their fills ,
sly kisses to the queen of night .
thicken into nets of twilight .
within the shelter of the rifle pits ,
my brave gallant friends , ' tis your ruin i mourn ;
enbrowded al witħ stones and perre
her closed eyes , like weapons sheath'd ,
“ but where is he , of virtue tried ,
of forest - trees and shrubs and sacred groves
to leue our vyce , and folowe the way of grace
as my full heart would wish ;
and the vast is a garment unto them .
decision against the latter .
my gossip , the owl , -- is it thou
of bold navarre ; whose guideless band to steer
& þe saȝtly{n}g of hy{m}-self w{i}t{h } þo sely besteȝ .
till , having gathered them all , he flung them abroad in derision ,
that i inheritt thy right hand .
what mortal , when he saw ,
for danaans hid in horse 's womb undoes the piny gate
she shall his anguish soothe , when he is wild ,
there let him hang , and hear the boast
it seemed to me i was of a sudden rapt in an ecstatic vision , and
the buck made no movement as he answered , " how long has this evil
hernica saxa colunt , quos dives anagnia pascit ,
for ease the slow _ maratta _ spoils ,
great jars laden with the raw green of pickles ,
never will they tread these uplands ,
and for her sake to bleed ?
sings a second , sets the siding ;
o , thy calm stare avert ! pass on , at least :
my son hezekiah 's a painter ; yes , that 's the purfession he 's at ;
swam across , and lived to carry
sublime th ' eternal thunderer rose in arms :
one and but one choice suitable to all ;
breath for breath , and kiss !
that the foe and the stranger would tread o'er his head ,
and shortest night , when longest fitter were :
but when of old his fury raged
cual salió humilde y pequeño .
“ will i deliver , finish so the war !
but i acquit him by a fair confession ,
the fair white limbs beneath the clouding dress
and those to come shall speak thee infamy
" more it grieves me , that thou hast caught me in the misery where
who deems obedience better praise
lassie wi ' the , & c.
sped them upon the summit quick as thought ;
another one ,
though no less universally , can touch
and vizy 's carvel starts to stir ,
had charms for him ; and here he loved to sit ,
a little fanciful knot in his tail .
ven dey found a - mordered pig .
that shone as heavens light ,
--here is a matter grateful to your ears--
and all their ragged bed exposed to view .
and thus fulofte is love boght
for , lo , the victim comes once more ,
his saviour calmly bowing his meek head
whispered to him ' neath the foliage .
by dropping in a dollar .
wherof was gret envie tho .
thinking of her he left , and his own death .
if need be , giving her his life ;
scedelich " .
to hands i can not see ;
and the brier - bush is sweet whar the burnie is rowin ' ,
his regal head , and frighted from his track
one fashioned by th ' high hand of utmost jove ,
sometimes a cell ,
scenes that harrow up his soul .
monographs and studies . by theodore child . profusely
and meat ,
_ protonotary _ , once the title of the chief clerk in the courts of
but our united voices blend
the blessed old volume ! the face bent above it--
and to the tell - tale sun descry
and undismayed behold
when jove in vengeance gives a land away ;
set each platter in his place ;
i am a friar of orders gray ,
inaccuracies are not to be found in his later poems.--warburton .
" the social , friendly , honest man ,
an ' jim an ' jo they run an ' bawl
on the loftiest limbs ,      and he liveth there
a hopeless love he crushed . until at last
all the secrets of the bygone ,
yet who am i ? nor first
colligit hinc sucos et odores diuite silua ,
clamour with jostling wings . now mayst thou see
o'er the rude sandy lea ,
full , sentient charms voluptuous evermore ! "
when we have lost life 's simplest passages ,
glory of glories ,      in greatness ruling
then the dreadful night shall break .
then through the world his way he gan to take ,
strike pang from pang as note is struck from note ,
the service which is freedom , beauty , song .
then psyche , trembling at the words she spake ,
" a furore normanorum ,
the drafted men fought hard and well ,
when on the lip the sigh delays ,
the song i sing to you ,
just at the perpetration of thy crime ,
that round patroclus closing , hop'd to bear ,
dusty and dirty and grim and solemn ,
too high a message now for man 's to reach .
is worthy bride , o king , for thee ,
by rose - hung river and light - foot rill
that keeps us live . the holy maid who sat
a child of good fortune .   his mien and his air
while the flow'rets crown the lea ,
killing me by fraud ; no man is killing me by force . '
apollo . and he made me splendid gifts ; he gave me seven
onward i sped at the time -- but now of their forms at night ,
that forces out its way , so burst at once ,
so early at my window do ?
and with blood his eyes o'erran .
she knocks all the heads of the children together ;
and welcomed royal - winged joy again .
bitterness in his heavy - clouded eyes ,
not so , if dame from heaven , as thou sayst ,
his eyes fixed vacant
mercy in his need ;
" yea , many thus would bargain for their dead ;
and , above all , fly , as the gates of hell ,
" by his own strength subdued them / the hero unsurpassed
and here he gave him such a pinch
anthon has adopted this common mistake , although wolf had pointed
it led me to the port of peace .
dighton rock character might be usefully employed in some
i sent out invitations
awake the mingling echoes of thy days ,
gadsbud ! my buzzing friend , thou art not dead ;
all spring through they falter and follow ,
but some good triton - god had ruth , and bare
and fix their pointed lances in the sand .
you 'll find her ready at a ca ' ,
with an ineffable content . what need
for sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds ;
and own that faith 's undying urn
and flee away from each other .
supine , and backward thursting it , he drew
army against army numberless to raise
for them no more the blazing hearth shall burn ,
is raging wildly round about ,
lay like a single sword within his hand ;
and saw her babe amidst the fire , and scream'd .
the air blew rank with the taint of fox ;
and felt tenfold confusion in thir fall
tho ' not yet half black !
spared neither land nor gold ,
taught by his summer spent , his autumn gone ,
she thus replied : " the chaste and holy race
an ' hurt her spleuchan ;
compiler _ and _ artist
and wake the dormant fire of death ?
and vnto _ ceres _ , first fruit of the field ,
strange to have crossed the crest and not to know ,
the year 's ingathering feast it is ,
his foemens ’ might , lord brahmá spoke ,
bobbing on the tawny eddies ,
be nearer him than when he sat upon her knees .
is to the west .
" you have hurt me , i know not how much , by the insinuation
seven lovely captives of the lesbian line ,
gay visions for thee ' neath hope 's pencil have glowed ,
o god most beautiful !
i 'm going , on this very day , to send
of vital strength , long worn by days of toil .
if i run in the race and win ?
and my own spirit , that already now
and with shut eyes sung low as in a dream ;
they paused to look around them for the scene
old fraulein laughed , a horrid noise .
' therewith the slayer of argos gave me the plant that he
nor up the lawn , nor at the wood was he ;
portusq ; certatim frequentes
beyond the border of the things that are .
what !   no return ?   i find too late , i fear ,
now every eye dissolves with woe
y de lejos muchas de ellas :
an envious golden kiss ;
and a cynical smile curled his sensuous mouth ;
where all so blooming stands ,
“ prepar'd the instrument of death . at once
so home through piccadilly and through oxford street we jog ,
i shall weep -- but their love will be cooling ; and he ,
thou with fresh hope the lover 's heart dost fill ,
the catafalque was made in field - bed wise
when the devoted lamb shall pour
and ful of bawme is fleting every mede ;
had sprung ; and wedded with an equal mate .
changed each ere tasting . when she came indeed ,
to soften hearts like morning dew ,
_ rosa mutabilis _ !
warriors comes their rest ! "
from april to december , in 1650 , are preserved in " miscellanea
more of the mount by us was now encompassed ,
non domito frenos ore momordit equus ,
casts them to sarjú ’s flood and joys
and sorely disgusted him .
i feel its impress now ;
there are things in the sandhills
were to thy fury pain proportion'd full . "
inconsistency , when the real truth is that nowhere exists much of
stricken ? why , with a superstitious fear of the gods .
to hover in a vain dream of defence
' tis even worse _ to get found out _ !
whence not unmoved i see the nations form
there is no more to conquer , and oi'll lay me down and doie .
but through all europe where do those men dwell ,
phthiotic mythus , wedded to the mortal peleus , saved zeus , by
we too can boast of no ignoble spoils :
not red accusing blood -- and ' neath our feet
and the lilies reviv'd , and the dragon - fly
is sometimes quitted by the creature , who
and thrill me with a sudden longing !
others that come into our own series , if we exclude the pathetic
still follows evil , came , and rais'd the wind
as the kind hospitable woods provide .
and calling through the silent sunset - glow ,
to the lamp of day , that the aureate beauty breaking
let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in himself ,
and in scarlet her array’d ;
serve thee for everlasting to this toil . "
made his secretary .   as indicated in the poem , charles
i should straightway reply , " that of thee hid ,
yet banks slope graceful up the steep ,
" this i told thee in the autumn ,
sweet love ! that dost apparel thee in smiles ,
where the sweet flesh lay loveliest to kiss ;
discs , or aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in
first came the lovely lion ,
in his own words we christ adore ,
but to himself he said , " i am the least
with startled faces . voices rose and fell ,
whispered thus unto the housewife .
he , being less , rebelled ,
ah dreamer ! ignorant how much in vain
o say the word , my soul shall liue .
must , soon or late , with anguish turn the scale ;
' even so , ' i said , ' even so , my brother the good cloud ? '
" ' some kill sheep , en some kill shote ,
on a stream of ether floating .
— to be alone the sacrificed ?
' twas a duke 's fair orphan - girl , and her uncle 's ward , the earl ,
which gifts are goodly ; but i will none .
" i guess they 're not losing much sleep over it , " i said .
revolved on heaven 's great axle , and her reign
kissed , and sweet , and thy prayers said ?
hearing her as she poked and fussed
turbid with sand and of discoloured hue ;
must be for me for burial , put me there .
as if a parting guest who comes no more,--
then little jake began to talk ,
the heuen and erth to knowe the heuyest
a gold - haired , sunny child came by ,
a priest is added , annual gifts bestow'd ,
or a sick child whines ,
guarding the home from maine to alabama
resistance would lie in the direction of making eurynome and
then the powerful king began to try this hero ,
but -- stirred , the eye seizes
under my old and ragged coat she lay ,
she kiss'd the infant 's closing eyes ,
what 's foreign one ca n't always keep quite clear of ,
then sacred altars rear , on sods of grass ,
petal from the magic iris ,
with blame requite her , and with evil word ;
waiting for the hero 's coming ,
before they fade .   the people i have met ,
learn the sad fate of her i loved so well .
sealed in the magic pages of that music ,
his bed amidst my tender breast ;
unpretending and subdued ,
could not but taste .   forthwith up to the clouds
in the yard or garden ground ,
" the foeman trembles in his camp , "
" praise god from whom all blessings flow . "
with black blood dripping from her eyes
why are you in such doleful dumps ?
free as i now shall be , o glamorous
even in the time of fruit .
factories , machinery , the mechanical forces , the windlass , lever ,
an ' when auld jock smairt saw the fashion o ' his cairt :
hath arrived and we shall make amends .
and each exalted stanza teems with thought .
red on her cheeks all the evening 's sunshine lay .
may , my dear ;
sparta , and mycenae . sack them whenever you may be displeased
but he made a mistake , and flew into the lake ,
will kindly thank the setter .
a lover never read ;
nor the moon by night
but maybe he nevva gon ' feenish at all .
suggestiveness , and is found in one form or other in the world 's
till they came adown to the river - side ,
too high to mate with an unequal soul ,
have shot my fawn , and it will die .
a bluidy man i trow thou be ;
make all men peers before the law ,
with wofull dolour menglyd , that euer shall last
deep - planning jove the imaginations proud
and found her dyeing cloth with subtle care ,
of boundless fragrance ; oil that in the courts
and near the high - ridged dodona , where
" so please your grace ! once more upon your clemency i call ;
yours without veil reflects it .   ye discern
then add , with an air convincing , she wishes she 'd never seen
at times reveal its traces .
well knowest who he was :   and to cut short
" _ the fetor of thy grim burnt offerings
a mighty fortress is our god , 66 .
to man primeval , the bright god of day
" that poet now has entered in
such dolorous strain they gurgle in their throats .
then nestor rose , and thus address'd the greeks :
" my cavaliers , " he began anew ,
chased us all a summer 's day ,
the silence of the place was like a sleep ,
a bluidy man i trow thou be ;
for fear that if you told the truth
and as a relicke to posterity ,
friend , " said he to the swineherd , " i will now go to the town
rapt her to deadly and infernal sleep .
then push'd her stout arm by the door ,
till now , as in a galleon 's hold ,
that is precisely our case ;
till it , too , seems a black shell almost bursting
when told that he could live on half ,
we can be rich in gentle smiles and sunny :
with roman caesars ; made rare vases peer
broad fire place where big logs did blaze ,
it flows along for ever ,
the god whom worlds adore .
get me a little wax , to make the stoppers , quick !
at morn the orphan hostess had received
for the gentle voice and the eye of blue
might in a wondering season seen afar ,
and moss around the stoven spreads , dark green ,
would flush our day ! "
overspread . and like a modest lady who abides sure of herself ,
forbid it , heaven ! this warning should be lost !
saw all the lads well mounted ,
i can not face it ! is there no hope but this ?
oh , stay at hame , my marrow !
shall bring him low , of death that lays men at their
dazzled nelly 's youthful eyne .
with the grizzled robe that democratic statesman loves to wear .
his weapon from the pendent sheath he drew :
if i could only come to thee ,
and the same moment , at a sudden pain ,
when our daughter is fey for a man ?
funde petens placidam romanis , incluta , pacem .
at length came their attendants / who garments fresh did bring ,
these wandering nymphs their path retrace ,
" no wonder , greeks ! that all to hector yield ;
this sold his fatherland for gold ; this tyrant on it laid ;
comes up besides escremiz de valterne ,
then come the wolf and tiger 's brood ;
( you 'll no longer dig the ditches ,
upon an auld tree root ;
over him in the front of the battle , and after him achilles
but we must use it discreetly , and not waste powder for nothing .
thy sacred song is like the trump of doom ;
and þai , þat na defens mycht mak ,
fandango twirls his jocund castanet :
within the torture - chamber , where we show
but , children , at midnight ,
must indifferently sicken ;
heard her words , and then responded :
when i thy singing next shall hear ,
vow'd to the cross , and wise the word to teach .
two monkeys in a corner show their navels ,
and when she drew the curtain by--
whatever the uncomely tale declare .
more bitter than a blow .
buy but one brimful cup of youth
she nor swooned , nor uttered cry .
to be beloved thanne i was ,
enthroned where all master souls stand up
" do not shoot us , hiawatha ! "
_ hearken , lady fair , says vidyāpati : _
she might before have seen the cavalier
but he who first the nation 's fate forecast
macte index mortuorum , macte rex viventium ,
and , swimming , how , amid the watery roar ,
comprehended but too clearly
gave them a twisted form vermicular
and over there , a choked despair ,
to force th ' invader from the frighted town .
would scorch them with his glance of fire ;
at what went on inside .
procné , he said , dictated . heavens ! how dark
were free from that elected race ; as light
not witting yet of any royalty ,
" and when it shineth , straightway call
into the moon 's pale ray ,
my mother 's sorter chubby -- but say , her step is
two captains next brought forth their bands to show
fluffy - dumpty got well very fast . but when she was about three
grows for a moment thin , and betrays the sun by its brightness .
but some they lift to glory and to god .
i leant upon a cool stone parapet .
all other towns , as books relate ,
he kneelëd down upon his knee :
miscent inter sese inimicitiam agitantes .
though now ' tis not with fred :
my accent 's not parisian , yet
then the good man built an altar and offered sacrifice
showing how i become the slowest yet
and from the top of sense , looked over sense
to see them yet again , and to arrive
most horrid ! ' mid stupendous , highly strange !
noted where thou exclaim'st as if in ire
but when the shot 's in rack
lie all the sorrows of old years .
a friend as beautiful as the moon , and who has in prospect
serpent , which is mentioned in the eleventh book , line 58 . ]
than in the broad expanse of sea and shore
were never folk so glad ;
this gift of ptolemaeus . ( 8)   who would think
he came there to take his last leave .
that heaven 's supreme decree can never bend
and magdalenes within the fold ,
never from eye or lip be seen or heard
is a stern task of soul:--no matter,--it is taught .
every island spoke in thiswise :
if right i judge , is diomed the bold :
to whoop up his art in the sweat of his brow .
_ watkins _ : " do n't overwhelm me . "
the hope that none would her accuser be ,
well are ye paired in your opening hour .
endurances ' : ' yes , i see all that and i agree with
firm united let us be , etc .
twine me laurel garlands ,
in moon , and stars ( heaven 's golden alphabet ! )
for past experience clearly shews ,
of the eternal silence : truths that wake ,
sits diotima , teaching him that died
then for every sweep of your pinions beating ,
and psyche said ' their cry shall be in vain . '
that some are like my own .
making them thinke it but a vision .
may calm and sunshine long be thine !
the decks were strew'd with slain :
and here her voice reach'd thee , but by what move
mighty and pure and fit to make
if thy dread hand hath graven on these walls
without the sweet concurrence of the heart .
she still pursues her craft ?
and thalaba awoke
but for his honor pricked , the landgrave takes
heart of night is throbbing ,
jove , grant me length of life , and years good store
and one peculiar nation to select
we hail the dawning day
herself a garden - flower .
buford lagged behind to nurse him ;
shut the mill - gate , leave the stall ,
so redolent of church all over ,
with his proud head the pole might easely tuch ,
where a hero may be hidden
and treasuring like gold seven times refined ,
thei caste it over bord als blyve .
you would n't think a fellow'd need much urging
full little thought they then
some died , some fell ; some yielded , none withstood :
now truths assume their sway ,
and heard but his own steps , and his own heart
oh ! let me be on the stormy sea ,
i 'll up an ' tend to my true love ! "
with ' here is the fiddler of dooney ! '
the old men look away .
season of the nativity takes an opposite line of thought , and
set in the skies
i hear the sacrilegious cry ,
his head is bowed . he thinks on men and kings .
why do you shiver so ,
composed a sonnet to the lovely may ;
and felt the merry breeze that blew ,
mindful of me all the days of thy life . '
we 'll take them as they come:--he next the wall ,
and forth the hurtling weapon went .
devinez ce qu'il arriva ?
chorus.--_to fight like a sailor for country and king . _
lies a cemetery olden ,
yet mem'ry oft will fondly brood on yon burn side ,
_ large _ , exaggerated .
place him but front to front with me ,
his friends ' advances , and the love - sick maids .
his round shield was with fire winged for slaughter .
clothing . ]
for a lady - companion or female relation,--
by its red gown hid )
a burst of sweet music , the listeners hear ,
the awful god than i or you .
the lofty citadel , they heard great noise
your children gathered back to your embrace
i thought i was sitting beside a stream ,
and , armed , in sheltering towers their enemies await .
he in honour ’s courses guide him ,
we will teach thee , to thine uttermost desire . "
amid th ' accordant sons of deity ,
which by the wavering wind was blown about ,
that loves the rain _ . "
didst thou ever walk the meadows ,
then , as you love me , take the stubs away !
by a turbid water spanned ,
have long a raree - show .
once more he stood upon the sirens ' rock ,
with earth 's waters make accord ;
which makes the scot and englishman so mad
is worth whole volumes theoretic .
the single star of all night 's zone ,
his glory , by whose might all things are mov'd ,
characteristic in them is the strange suggestion of a deliberate
thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land ,
hung in the gloom of my doorway ,
whose barren souls thy joys disdain ,
my virgin flower , my flower of flowers ,
nor art , nor nature 's band can ease my grief ,
and there i had three score o'yowes ,
i had a liddle dog , his name wus ring ,
so the tradition of his glory lingers--
but only shut his eyes , and kept
in spain , he 'd make a ballad or romance on
unto my first intent . go on now , for one sole will is in us both :
swords that once a monarch bore ,
i mene that benygne and goodly of face
before its tumult .
striking their camp beneath the silent night
and other beasts and other humane birth .
weak lyre ! thy virtue sure
neck by neck , stride by stride , never changing our place ;
do her own work ; and leave the rest to fate .
what thou ne'er left'st unsaid ;
then all my fire of love shall fail
acclaimed and tempted and allured again
is not unnatural , is it ?
unknown to us , ourselves unknown to them .
in bloody fields , sad seas , and countries desolate ,
how coolly i can read you ,
all night have i heard voices : deeper yet
means for her recovering ;
it is my son who gladly tells
and he bore the flask to the brightest spot ,
the naked and concealed fiend he cover'd ,
ay , fortune worked thus wantonly !
to the kisses of the breeze ,
till noding more abbears
hear not we , unthinking creatures !
though man is weak yet he may join
of a world we came from , a world of sun - blue hills . . .
to heave the trysail brace .
pinnacled , safe , supreme . sun of thy race .
hark the mavis ' evening sang
an ' wi ' rhetorie clause on clause
turns , and forth stretches eager for the food ,
had sailed to the spanish main ,
was the thing done?--then , what 's to do again ?
ye argent clarions , sound a loftier strain
lone wand'ring by the hermit 's mossy cell :
though placed in paradise , for earth has still
and willow garlands hang on ev'ry bough . ]
he said , and all sat silent , till at length
what if the valiant turks and persians bold ,
he sniffs the chilly air ; ( his dreaming starts ) .
za ' kyn thos , or zante -- an island near corfù .
and here i purpose styll for to be
it was night on the line , it was no more fire ,
he says that she shall never miss
in time of need the buffalo , and bind
the trembling bog and false morass ;
all the godless towns of the many - ruffianed rivers .
they smell the coming rain .
' tis our companion countless miles ,
they prate and prattle pleasantly
thy footing firm , but more than half a league
cultivated in the loose soil ,
with hopeless heart felt the swift hours go by ,
gained tribute for _ saint - pierre _ . in this our land
why is the triumph of pride on thy brow ? "
we will revenge the death of this true wife . '
the great processional , splendid dream
breathe back the deep breath of their old delight ,
becomes entangled with seaweed ,
and knowing that all the words which were spoken .
but for those obstinate questionings
and so he groan'd , as one by beauty slain .
" listen ! there are voices talking . "
' oh , send us to our just reward
how brief an interval divides us now .
as thogh it were trowthe and feith ,
in the flow of a marvellous tune !
wise odysseus , the hapless one , who far from his friends
was it not necessity ?
and the widows there and the orphans ,
there remain , my forest - apple ,
to thy bright face , bright eyes , and beauteous hair ,
like teneriffe or atlas unremoved ;
and hoped that they might strike him pink !
sound on , ye hymns of heaven , so sweet and mild !
memories describe it as one of turvey 's master - works :
with homely turn and twist .
( o the black ships ! o the fierce ships !
and the clever little daisies
who didst the largess of our kingly court
the fire is placed ; _ where _ , think you ? not below ,
to bounding joy , and make young pulses beat
we have sung its days of beauty ,
the locomotive animals prey upon them , or upon each other ;
when the glow of early thought declines in feeling 's dull decay ;
now at forty he 's selected
safe is your secret still in chloe 's ear ;
is fame , and virtue by the deed itself ,
bade grief farewell .
" fast the church - yard fills;--anon
frae the dark and troubled sky :
his ithaca refused from favouring fate ,
the white stars of the bloodroot peep'd from folds
through gothic helm and brain it passed ;
but who knew that i grieved to see her lose
to touch the seluage of thy sacred weede :
but gebir when he heard of her approach
" sir ! you have disappointed us !
of chaste fidelity upon the chaste :
" no misfortune , but what some one turns to his own
whence heavie persecution shall arise
and dropping splendid tears .
o god , and in thy light retrace
and he was aware of a whisper blown
drove them screaming from their eyries !
" mi sone , i am be double weie
those ayrie feather’d arrowes in the darke
heard his hunter 's call and echo ,
could we stand a merry cross - counter then ,
that other was as paradise , when god
thy tinkling rills , thy heath - clad hills ,
epic " waltharius " , a m.h.g . epic , and the " thidreksaga "
even through your muddled old canine brain
and , never having dreamt of falsehood , she
and set two windows in the tower
from peasant 's hut to lordly bower . "
poore verdant foole ! and now green ice , thy joys
her skin was like a grape , whose veins
with their smiles and their tears ;
the rule of three per - plex - es me ,
her eyes the bright gems of golconda outshine ;
my master said , " if thou discernest him . "
a quire 's rune , in onyx dress ,
secured it by an unforgiving frown
wove by her hands the wreath of deathless fame .
for human hearts ;
of tempests can no more disturb thy ease ;
so spake th ' apostate angel , though in pain ,
_ yet peace is theirs ; a life true bliss that yields ;
these be thy gods , o israel !   who is he ,
we talk with joyous seeming--
strong against future harm ;
thus , thus to come unto me ;
though thou with everlasting faith
sorrow is hard to bear , and doubt is slow to clear ,
they from all hope but heaven part !
god grant me faith to stand on guard ,
to me incline thine ear !
fall through sick weakness of a broken will
to think that in our often - ransack'd world
a charge her garden 's labyrinths scarce confute ,
has just that path made free ,
and some people say not a groat ,
" go thou , take thy father 's vessel ,
assí que qualquiera | cuerpo ya muerto ... ( str . 244 )
thee now would i give it . '
short , stout , grey - headed , but of sterling worth !
" and is this one of them , mr . johnson ? " i asked , unfolding a
in the throng he slew      three of the sailors ,
and the way steep ,
water , calling it to its bath .
wake her from her tomb !
old ocean where they will . " onward they surged ,
and what shall i do ? "
rakes the swift and boiling current
the days of my youth rise fresh in my mind ,
and yet he loved his kind , the sick at heart , the poor ,
brother , as long as life lasts .
whether she 's greeted by the flowers of june
' look on his following leaves , and see him breath . '
but they said , " it 's absurd to encourage this bird ! "
o it 's i that am the captain of a tidy little ship ,
and play that the light of years agone
with dew from flower and leaf , these lovers met--
* camel : -- _ oo _ is pronounced like _ u _ in " bull " , but
shall sing to you exactly as they choose ?
that 's an old cuddy of flanagan's--
we hear it , each and all--
crushed down with woe .
and twists the grain with such a roar that earth
his easy stomach never car'd
up through the next floor on its way
their slender length for rafters spread ,
rakes the tuoni river bottoms ,
" o , who 's that knocking at the door . "
yet therefore naught the more remov'd her sight
i am bound on , o my glory , o thou that art
alcestis ! livest thou my words to heed ?
far o'er the waste of yonder surgy field
at peace , or will be soon :
to cover up the embers that still burn .
who calls me ?
they hated her , who took no thought of them ,
but to one side , high in the distance , the poisonous moon ,
avail . "--renewing then their hues and cries ,
when he spoke for our manhood in syllabled fire ,
through which all things grow phantoms ; and the cloud
they seek to find in those they love
beyond the reach of longing eyes .
turns hither or thither , and hence or thence is fed ;
her footsteps drawing nearer , and the sound
and instantly a dog is seen ,
the gallows to be my share .
gone the abbot stern and cold ,
wept for in vain , that op'd the heavenly gates
gave more than human strength .   no man of them
and yet , and yet , return anon ,
but who within this garden now can dwell
the slumbers of the world . the sky above
upon the phrygian hill
on the coast of the stormy cape cod .
which , in the sunshine of prosperity
he works for _ certainty _ and not for _ fame _ !
with smile avuncular and bland ,
a maudlin poetess , a rhyming peer ,
shot : the swift shaft hath shorn the plume away .
auld scotland wants nae stinking ware
with a crash and a thud , rolled -- the head of the boh !
loose stones that ice made terrible ,
“ impunity ; nor e'er returning see
shouldst boast a deeper insight .   we are born ,
that blood , whose least drops soueraign be
boy scouts camping went .
wi ' painfü ' pleesure .
each arch an entrance was ; up which might go
how much he held that regiment in price .
and , as she came back with a rod and line that swung ,
now on the front , now flaming on the rear ,
these puny cockneys far ,
' t is the same landscape which the modern mars saw ,
where stars like flowers shone ,
the tortures which beset my path ,
at length -- a doctor one 's declared to be,--
and sayd , ‘ lord , your officers grete you well ,
yes , oaten fields are white and ripe for reaping ,
it makes me simply furious ,
not without joy -- so radiant , so endow'd
yet stars will watch at night , and morning rise as before , and
i wandered out one summer night ,
and a thousand fragrant posies ;
the dusk was blue with blowing mist ,
that mourns in exile his unequal fate ,
his leathern garb , thorn proof ,
munific_e_ntia , graci_us _ ampliare . laus industrie tue _ et _ fame
take each step higher over the brute 's head .
did paint the tones ,
art thou that traitor angel , art thou hee ,
and all this weary world below
thou more ; that with it every day dar'st jest
( _ the mermaid dances the floor upon _ )
but though erect as poplar straight ,
instruct us for what cause , the mount erewhile
and tinctures natural .
warriors they see , who drank the wine - bowl deep ,
which saves us all with ease ;
spake in purity as follows :
and old world melodies that else
time breathes on the tablet , it fades with his breath ;
if we should write a world of books . in brief
and fire to keep you warm .
not here , are exiles . ( 3 )   ignorant of war ,
where , heedless of the flying hoof
and bide by the buff and the blue .
from rock to rock transpicuous , making known
wide heaven . and if we may yet reach ithaca , our own
the _ honest anger _ of the _ muse _ ,
et les hêtres , les chênes royaux des forêts
of indivisible supremacy .                       a.l .
and god will give his wonted help no more .
with that famed bow ulysses taught to bend ,
takes out children , puts in ladles :
a graceful figure happily is join’d ,
in the light of her down - drawn eyes ,
who knows if , on some after day ,
if so,--no wonder thou should'st look
us well acquainted with this place : but here ,
love 's sister , by the same
love 's service is in vain .
then he rein’d his faithful sharaz backwards ,
while i nodded , nearly napping , suddenly there came a tapping ,
materiaeque grauis concretio , sucus ab alto
knows no discord ;
storms upon storms in quick succession crowd ,
his beast , and his mounting attended . "
the shotted musket 's murderous peal ,
evils in thy chosen mountain ,
" oh , be careful ! " murmured miss herron . " it 's very dangerous . "
a wise king girdled by a foolish council)â
they shall uplift thee , lest at any time
shall i say , i have gone at dusk through narrow streets
and , waking up , snap goes the slight
and visions vast and small .
past me the spun pines rock and hiss ,
i love their orchards where the gay woodpecker
upon his throne she sits , the beggar maid--
( which my cotton was ready to bale ) ,
sweet wife , i come to your new world ere long ;
night and day thou art safe as living thing can be ,
" whoo - ee ! " she cried in perfect ecstasy , as we
of a dowry not to be had ;
death and the darkness give you unto me ;
there when the flags were red and white
when i am rotten as a pear ,
to feel cold hands at his heart ?
and caught my guide .   alcides whilom felt
that if criseyde , whiche that is thy leef ,
passion held o'er me . day and night
yielding good without alloy ,
and the deepest , blissful gladness ,
yes , the lettered and the unlettered powers are
they are the choicest warriors ; of th ' amelungers ' land .
a smoke go up through which i loom to her
how many a mighty cauldron rattled and rang again !
grey stone pulpit .   the villagers settled to listen -- he did not
above what rapt dreams of best poets are .
like a dog has treated him .
in the upper world abide .
" sir,--since my last return from the canary islands in 1807 to
set forth to the eyeless desert on the tower - top of the world ,
holding a valiant heart and strength of arm ,
that graced the chiefs of scotia 's antient realm ?
to that mute conclave great against the stars .
one half so kindly as they thought before .
perhaps , they near some state - house beg relief ,
" birds'-nests soup , indeed ! " exclaimed ko ; " why , chang wang never
the armada touches at natal
to hide the chasm 's nakedness .
the cause spreads over land and sea ;
his heart was as the heart of his whole land ,
o'er the orchard 's hedge embrasures ,
as the too brief mountain sunshine flies ,
and that they might be so indeed ,
as to the door they struggled , / on dire vengeance bent .
impertinent beast !
wholly bewildered and amazed .
that mows whole troops , and makes all troy retire ;
a darling daughter to receive , bestow .
rose - red lilies that bloom on the banner ;
yet to each loving heart how near !
reject not lightly a perpetual grace ,
did vow to do his charge ,
little maria is saying her lessons .
other little children
and it is here used therefore in its primitive sense .
some droll or ticklish situation,--
pounce on the tree , and , as he rush'd , the rind ,
but , little old poem that nobody reads ,
of spring water,--thirty or forty miles :
to serve at the sign of the drum .
and dragged away the helpless dame ,
i will not betray thee , my own geraldine .
the stars have lived for a million years
o cyder is a great thing ,
unto his mantled sister , day
prit le plaisir pour code .
show us the uses of this work of yours . "
his hands now free , ' thou venerable sky !
then downward shot , and in the salt sea spray
and round and round ,
to maken of hir speche aright an ende .
alice with lilies in her hands , and little dark dolores
refute it , if you can , with all your wit !
whence in the second circle have their nest
like a rain - soaked watermelon .
but where the silver - sandalled shadows are ,
set out , at each his pace ;
in this narrow bed ;
he would come down our way ;
i may the beaute of hem not sustene ,
but the good nurse shook her head .
when yonder i inform me , / whence may so great lamenting be . "
i ’ve been hunted like a panther into my mountain lair .
we tramped a thousand miles that night , at fifty cents apiece !
that those who duty slight for wealth ,
the peers assent : when straight his sacred head
both , children of the same dear god ,
flesh - shrouded bearing the secret .
whose flag has braved , a thousand years
towardes god he tok debat ;
before him loomed a toiling at mean wages ,
i listen'd , motionless and still ;
curculio ( 462 ) , which directly refers to rome . ]
for well the deep green gardens doth she know .
there flaunts the gadding woodbine , swells the ground
the wail of hearts he has broken , the sound of human ill ?
we hear , indeed , and see , but do not prove
and necks ' soft wool broken in yellow flakes ,
a wise man ev'ry way lies square ;
between the homes for many years
it is human nature maybe to be borne ’ long with the crowd ,
of the fair queen for whom he burned ;
shapes of turbulent manly cities ,
beneath the beech his fearless couch had made ;
the daylight waned ; but ere the sun
wildering escort , whirls along ,
one drop from their cup of sorrow ,
the snow was wrapped about its head ,
_ chariessa . _     each dim star ,
a donjon - keep , where clothes might dry ,
but i -- i am first in the battle , "
born to contend with wind and wave :
oh , this world : this cheating and screening
' tis not that -- but alas!--but i can not conceal
and sees he can not pierce the hostile round ,
from the state of the prince or the millionnaire !
and pray , then , why do you marry us ,
drifting on his dreary way ,
and kiss the hills for me , just once ;
which though far distant , yet with constant pace
thou need'st but take thy pencil to thy hand ,
i ’ll seek the sweetest flower that grows ,
ah ! wounds of christ ! they were living things ,
the law i gave to nature him forbids :
and cornel bow , the prowling dog - wolfs fear ,
i am restless .   i am athirst for far - away things .
the curse is gone , the bond are free--
and speaks of alma bell , that alma bell
where are we going , rubee ?
he dying bore my sins , and the third day
and every warbler has his tune by heart .
whose fountains ever run with joyful speed ,
the harp of the forest sounds music ,
affliction on your shore ; for rest , i think ,
to a heart conscious of such high intent
heavy with ancient pain from faded centuries ,
by a ' the rest it is confest ,
thus clad in waves and locks , her eyes divine ,
and none beside , amid this numerous show !
bleeding his life out .   oh ! what a cry was that
with a coarse and clumsy besom
he threw me here , and went but now his way :
_ there _ are days of summer sunshine ,
with the slow steps of indolence , my room ,
can not sail without assistance ,
another lesson from the pie,--
such was our hope in that dark hour
no tidings good their billows roll ;
and her arms along the deep proudly shone ;
full of strange hues forgotten , contraband
my wandering love has no coat to cover him .
it 's no through hatred o ' a kiss ,
the boding bat flits by on sullen wing ,
fair as the neck of paphia 's boy ,
nor can it hush itself to ease
this frenchman falling , with his very weight
how gallantly , how nobly ,
let me be as the wind - bell by the temple .
precedents icily written on high
but natural dungeon where ill footing was
where he can steal in easily , alone .
their laps with the snails
to suttin questions proposed by mr . hosea biglow , enclosed
this silent hero of battles
the monstrous ledges there to slope , and spill
beyond the tumult and the proud acclaim ,
bozzaris cheer his band :
say that the fates of time and space obscured me ,
full beautiful -- a faery 's child ,
fly to and fro , or on the smoothèd plank
to comprehend the case .
ay , of all the artists living , loving ,
fate 's crushing power , or nature 's gentle skill ,
that would have soared like strong - winged birds
on the high triumph of thy realm to gaze !
for many things will ' beat the dutch , '
the battle and the toil to share ;
in water , earth , and breeze ,
quanquam -- exoptatam jam spes attingere dotem ;
to execute thy sacred will ,
but nature renders it imperfect ever ,
felt too , a sort of swimming in his head ,
in fact it gave them something nice to do ,
all vain was the resolve -- his cup
" it is here , and yonder are the troops . have i done well ? "
a spirit , yet a woman too !
wounded and fetter'd , ' cabin'd , cribb'd , confined , '
and i too late shall sorrow !
loading and firing blind ,
shall not wound my dearest brother ;
untill my spouse , of her owne selfe , shall rise
but to thyn help yet somwhat can i seye .
with stores of honeyed juice , may meet . ”
the trojan troops and tuscans , in a line ,
speeds it ; the arrow , fixt beneath his ear ,
but ’ tis best to give us cold ,
looking for her kinsmen , / as friend for friend full good .
and mertoun 's halls are fair e'en now ,
for after good long feeding comes
' ye wait for my yea - saying
such was the theme for which my lyre i strung ,
a red swan lifts red wings
though you may not know , yet the tree shall grow
to her that is the fairest under heaven ,
' neath burdens graver than mine--
one presence missing everywhere .
mouth awry , and head downsunken ,
followed the piper for their lives .
for a very fine turtle that day was set out ,
his horse he pricks with both his golden spurs ,
in one hand the reins of magic ,
there are houses surely which open their door
invites to supper him who dines ,
" i 've been so busy with my clubs
of marble columns , or for arsenals
the rich , the poor , one common bed
joy so peacefully departs ,
impregnate at my heart , some little space
wi ' that his frien ' , the knicht , spak ' up an cried ,
on the mountains snow is melting ,
yet leaving here a name , i trust ,
the mossy banks and the meandering paths ,
and dance upon the mountains like a flame .
dishes should have some sort of taste .
the gods are good !   the world lies free to capture !
in the throng was this one thirteenth man ,
i do not know how long in the snow i wrestled with grisly fear ;
to fan the earth now waked , and usher in
but let there ever be a place
long already were we fireless ,
the hills hang woods around , where green , below
" so you sang ! " sneered the ant . " that relieves me .
the mariners shout ,
nero , which hadde noght foryete
that thou wilt know , though dead and gone ,
of their lieutenants valorous afar .
now when the poor brook murmured , " mother dear ! "
there you are -- piff ! presto ! "
here gladly entertained , and classed as one
with arms like anchor - cables in their strength :
ever put on ; a miserable crowd ,
and sways with gentle influence ;
thenkende , and that me liketh noght ,
because on the bones of the english the english flag is stayed .
leaping and flashing
which while it hid no single gleam
but the people of the elder ice , beyond the white man 's ken--
bless'd be that hand divine , which gently laid
aded gynt , ettiynt , hyd yn _ irfer _ hallt . "
many a long league back to the north .   at last
wherever it blooms ,
once i lay on that sod -- it lies over wolfe tone--
reynolds , and there are no satiric strokes in the picture . if we
and sink her soul on the delusive sloth ,
a law immutable hath establish'd all ;
whence he for this shall cease not with his art
there falls each ancient barrier that the art
is it the _ thought _ does all from time 's first hour ?
the roar of rage , the shriek of pain ,
the one doth shadow of your beauty show ,
why thus my soul should be consigned
i have drunk it through mine eyes
i leave thee ever , ' saith she , ' light of cheer . '
to see if time was there .
instance , the force of all such sensations is increased by the
though alien , though to an upper seat retired ,
rest will remain !
six o'clock .
the rations now arriv'd , each took his share ,
on thy charmed way ;
from living a life even worthy of the gods .
up to the light ,
showing neither joy nor sorrow ;
for my love is at my side .
in the days that are gone , by this sweet - flowing water ,
" crooned , " so as to be audible , it seems , to the patient , the
and here drink th ' unmindful draught from wells of oblivyon .
why then , if the honest plain truth i may tell ,
the rev'rend gray - beards rav'd and storm'd
love to see men fight and die
in narrow room natures whole wealth , yea more ,
dwelt with eternal summer , ill - content .
the bravely - patient to no fortune yields :
his cities o'er he told ;
venus to cyprus and to paphos , where is her grove and her altar
they say dead waifs are oft by night
the careful study of long months , it won
i thenke don in this matiere .
the desperate crew ascend , unfurl the sails
after the daring women pitiless
should tell you how you might improve , you would be glad to try .
warm with the softest wool , and doubly lined .
let it befall that one will call ,
sailed in thy ship across the stream oceanus , where is a
and when the miller saw that they were gone ,
to let the laughter flash ,
that all in counterpoise must kick the beam .
little dutch girl on the corner . it really worried her that the
lilith thereto : “ meseems not long ago
the dulcet symphony of paradise ,
and , oh , but it sung sweet !
my flowers ! for what is most beautiful
and the joy of things that last .
campagna , girt by purple hills , afar,--
and sure of all his heart desired ...
could match the harpies ' wings .   riding thereon
the moor - lark in the air ,
and at length upon the third day ,
as to the lord of gods she spoke :
so answer'd him in few my gentle guide .
and the sun knew not , and the face knew not
with fixt and motionless observance bent
luxury , calm and voluptuousness .
" the shadowy cloud ; there , downward pours ,
stanza lxxix . line 3 .
the frightened pony plunged a lot ,
his spirit within them ; and the law of faith ,
to us five lasses .
which many tales for many praises note ,
and thought , and hope , and longing infinite !
leaving on our hearts a stain ?
sitting safe in nursery nooks ,
he praised her " queenly beauty " first ; and , later on , he hinted
and pluck her sweet delicious fruits ,
and ours the priceless gain .
  107 . = lake leman= ; another name for lake geneva .
masculine , or both with their feminine ethers , repel each other
and he beat them with sticks , and he kicked them with kicks ,
cast down in heart the spot i leave ,
and the one - year old to bridle ,
jove 's tempering ' twixt his sire and son ; and hence
the rose has but a summer reign ;
' tis meet that i should mourn:--flow forth afresh my tears .
struck not in answer ; magnus ' swords were cold ,
dismiss all sorrow from thy breast .
whether thro ' wimplin worms thou jink ,
i float , so near the infinite , i seem
children frowning o'er the problems
a hope worth flying to?--
but he is foreign , being french .
gazed he where the dog 's snout pointed ,
through man and beast , through grain and grass .
justly presageful of a fate behind .
and through their fever , grief , and fret
the green ghosts of the trees :
' tis sion , wheresoe'er they dwell ,
the last good king ; in ancient days foretold ,
i offer my salaam,--
in this quiet spot this day of june ,
sho ez i 'm erlive !
beyond that wish , all these now cancel must ,
gloveless , hatless , do the workmen
tricked by the balancing odds ;
as this roof was tightly jointed .
and in your mien a graver grace ;
the winter garment of repentance fling :
they try us , oftenest make us hard ,
the monarch turns him to his royal guest ;
that ye stand fast -- oh be not turn'd to flight !
cast themselves one by one down from the shore ,
which still holds me from the ground ?
upon that horse which has no earthly peer ,
remember'd when thy loving hand is still
while you lie asleep on the floor ;
" no , " said murphy , " no more ,
boldly stepping to the rattle
and all round not to be found
nor void of emblem was the mystic wall ,
needest not yet dread death , nor the pangs of death , though thou
then spake the youthful giselher : / " sister to me full dear ,
et parere deo : uiridis en ire per herbas
to novel and disastrous happenings , for once ,
' and was he something by himself ? ' asked una .
lo , at last haue found our way .
o world of husbands ! world of tender wives !
" blast the all - fired old torch ! " said john , wrestling
flashed all their sabres bare ,
( except , perhaps , the skin of beat , )
thy shrine in some religious wood ,
to gain a sceptre , oftest better missed . "
leaps forth to fill the woven net
but merely serve the club as waiters ,
when west winds blow , i 'll whisper in her ear :
and looke into the christall firmament ;
till range of his vision
cares are employments ; and without employ
the loose white clouds are borne away .
the city 's pride it doth find vent
' mid heavy mats of leaves that lay
and all broke instantly .
upon that spot , as upon all ,
church , being willing to help the puritans , who were , he says ,
" and let the harm already done suffice ;
i know too well the poison and the sting
in most men 's hands but splendid dross
provided outwardly its flame appear .
and thus thei slepen bothe abedde ;
and then take hands :
each attempt seems to shatter the chaplet again ;
from birds or beasts -- he did n't care !
that sche sprong up out of the molde
i am riht in the same cas .
dead by the thousands ; that some queen
i cast thee off , both thee and thine . ”
ere long contagious grew , and spread
i know the god of love has spent his arrows winged to smart ,
i shall not die for thee         "       "
like some lithe snake she turned and cringed
gitche manito , the mighty ,
or chafe for any lack .
a life of labour earn'd , driven from his home
beautiful , entire , and clean .
all the lilies of the prairie ,
marks each blindfold minute passed ;
oh for a man to weld it then , in one trip - hammer strain ,
amidst these huge hotels and regal domes
  _ as moved the tongue , etc . _ : the shade being enclosed in the
fat ruddy cheeks augustus had :
¡ cuan solitaria la nación que un día
as apollo is playing at quoits with the youth hyacinthus , one of
or make a pretty curtesy ,
yet even they , a little , grew ,
and christe receive thy saule .
and his eyes did wink , and he sang " tink a tink ! "
toss'd up the silver spume against the clouds .
o'er the enchanted landscape reigned ;
millions of tongues record thee , and anew
they now entered a new passage .
seizes up and swallows down ;
nor watch the swallows sudden dip and rise .
throws , for an idle show , the life of man !
track with -- to woo ; to " go walking with . "
if you get simple beauty and naught else ,
vaśishṭha , chief for reverend age ,
and here my brethren , who their steps refrain'd
now speak and say , my popinjay ,
( oh they are all one these vagabonds ) ,
through channelled darkness for the darkling day
can not quench the remembrance of morrow .
thou late held'st council ? ever ' tis thy way
introduction even of phrases not in harmony with the original
when some fair princess might be thine ?
through pleasant and through cloudy weather ;
i , champion of the giants , scorn
is custom of the duke or , by his seal
but not for you _ our _ world 's bright tumults are ,
_ virginia . _ the knot is hard and i am dazed . i tremble .
her bundle from her lap let fall ,
old joy , dead hope , dear love ,
he oft employs me in disguise ,
ye wear your robes of white .
her milder sway endures , then riseth up
bound hand and foot . "
besides i give thee here a verse that shall
from the loosened string ,
ulysses gave irus a blow on the neck under the ear that broke in
nor wad the faut be theirs if not
have sight of proteus rising from the sea ;
he fell again , and forth appeared no more .
there with my love my brother greet ,
lest i say the prayer of evil ;
hissing along the vale , and after him
and the great labor , this labor of translation , of making america
this threefold love is mourn'd .   of th ' other sort
of meadows where in sun the cattle graze ,
in gold three [ h]bloudy cheuernells doe bring ;
stay and read this rude inscription ,
where 's marsilies , to come to me was bound ? "
ilmarinen , ancient blacksmith ,
this day 's propitious to be wise in .
my youthful eyes , and led him by their light
is a bow of darkness ;
if you be wise ,
i know not if the fault be men 's or theirs ;
to whom with healing words adam replied .
until they found the clear - faced king , who sat
“ haply report has sounded in your ears
a full conception , and brought forth with ease .
at sunny morn i 've stood ,
a basilisk ?   swift through the weapon ran
question thus the new - come stranger :
suddenly espied she something
that my heart learnt not without love to live ,
down on the roof so brown--
raud the strong blaspheming died .
i tried to make him talk about his travels .
booted and spurred , with a heavy stride
that , as he weens , the fact can verify .
were a pebble - stone that a child 's hand poises ,
why is your heart in winter 's garments clad ?
we have made up our minds to bid,--in which manner , not
for my own land 's sins : for little feet
shared with thee ,
enchanted drew .   whoe'er frequents me once
through the hush'd spirit flows a waterfall .
since i left my home and country ,
the shadowed light of evening fell :
one helpless innocent , learchus nam'd ,
it is her moonlit silence at the door ,
as goes the crowd , i follow .
that flows so fast in these unmanly tears ?
what ’s love ? you ask;—why , love at best
intonation . then followed a species of recitative , probably with
and the springing of the flowers ;
her hand may snatch , on which of caesar 's limbs
there
seem to have been deemed of especial virtue in incantations . ]
till the songs of birds rang clearer
then throne their own capricious will ;
for where thou goest i will go ,
pale as a drifting blossom ,
nothing save the moon 's bright sphere ,
that blind may see and deaf may hear aright ,
so very dear to me ,
fullness of joy , forever and forever .
fuller and softer in the moonlight pale
when the boat 's ribs were constructed ,
warm valleys where the tired student lies
the outraged husband pursued them and a fierce battle was
your fine property , and telemachus still holds your lands
and calm religion shall repair
sound that lives when sounds are done ,
and i shall never end this life of blood . "
sinks down her eyes from their first height .
then on your guiltier head
" glad tidings of great joy i bring
of which ezekiel complains as idolatrous , accusing the women
but , where the road runs near the stream ,
let daw ' that sair an ' happy day !
the piety of speech .
yet with thee am i not as an arm of the vine ,
to that sweet life which is the law .
in mary 's happy eyes !
from the woman 's fair fame it in naught could detract :
for through the mists which darken there ,
bobolink ! that in the meadow ,
is there one link within the past
and winds and rains so wild ;
chase the lynx upon the mountains ,
' they cheer his pluck and enterprise and engineering skill !
that blest my happiest hours .
be she with that goodness blest
to his next plantane surgeon,<82.6 >
` and ther thou seyst , thou shalt as faire finde
man , made in god 's own image , yet the one
came home by the light of the moon .
snored out ( as if some _ clerk _ had given
is all in books , and that the truth is found
thou hast done well .
but how can i tell you ?
and death , tired of the sport ,
she was , from the first , an object of curious and
my much praised , but not altogether satisfactory lady .
hear what highland nora said,--
they 're crying out , " a lile bit mair ! "
and challenged by the sentinel of space ,
with its sun upon the roses and its long summer day ;
from them , how many a young ambition sought
empty her seat in the franklin 's hall ;
all they , who look'd to christ already come .
' alas , no ! on sea and land my life seems to have been one long
though it be rife with woe : it answers me .
now to those men who dare
' yea , noble queen , ' he answered , ' and so late
from aught unworthy , the determined will
as parts the clouds a bolt by winds compelled ,
  _ as rome 's corvinus._--valerius maximus , a roman tribune , who
there is a coward sparing in the heart ,
in monstrous tumult fraught with prodigies
the mound of sand , which late in play he rais'd ;
in very thin clothing , and but little of it;--
loud o my throat , and clear o soul !
its beautiful leaves , in the spring time may bloom ,
" so they both went slowly down ,
while boundless hopes and boundless views inflame ,
ddoeth , fain oleugoeth , fy nau lygad ,
where old friends meet .
many people hope , but few are not disappointed .
tho ' robb'd of half their native charms ,
with pure and happy thoughts , as summer woods
throughout the state he ’s won the hate
therefore i mourne and endlesse sorrow make ,
no mean , no human artist laid
he rode in state , but his carriage - fare
under this elm , the shadiest of the trees ,
displeased . _
lavater says -- the soul is seen
as it would else her harassed soul have shent .
a pretty mistake i opine !
his weie made , and thei him wonde ,
they may argue an ' even quarrel ,
but their thoughts are widely parted .
on whom the light had not yet shone ,
the earth his sober inn
in the days of the years we dwell in ,
“ i rede ye treat him fair ;
but my country is free , and my own country , and oh , my country
night would invade , but there the neighbouring moon
temptations of the world , and the good angels who fought against
" glory to god , " it said , " for in the skies ,
and a blind bull more headlong plunges down
lingers and lolls , loth to be done with day :
thy easy fingers to the shaft apply ,
for thinkin ' , thinkin ' as i lay
when the country 's monarch / had gained the outer air ,
in mariage upon wifhode
if well the dice run , let 's applaud the cast , ii . 18 .
pompeius ' victory , nor the frequent car
no , alfred ! you will , i believe ,
but youthful nestor , jealous of his fame ,
an aim on thee he hath .
was from the reins averted :   and because
that 's hymn'd in heaven , but hath no echo here ?
mere didactic chaff ) ,
i must confess i love old books !
come away , come away ,
roost deep in the rocks .
upon it the figure of the poetry existing in their mythology and
the cloud , it knows not that it glows ;
common and beautiful as light and air ,
a feeling first of joy , and than a sharper , greater one
then why did ye whiten with fear to - day
and up when the fisher his fishing - line drew ,
upon the ends , where burnished sunbeams slept ,
and , day by day , have urged
that i have been abused ; my reign
the eyes of my own lady lifted me ,
i was not his to give .
his stately port , and princely look behold .
his living load , his dying body tore .
the voice is yours , whate'er you say .
is there a motive thou wouldst hide ?
but all that night ,
gama commences his story
or glide a spectre in the realms beneath ;
am weary , thinking of your task .
more grateful , to thir supper fruits they fell ,
and for a moment there
one more kiss , o widowed one
wafted to us on the wings of night
quod fuit argolico iuuenis phoceus orestae ,
' long de country roads ;
disclosed in flames of fiery light .
" help me to move my sister siegfried for lord to take . "
such as admiration whets
were thine in store , thou faithful friend .
the world will never see his kingdom bright .
and bromingham in stuffs and druggets deal .
we hope you 'll view our garland ,
fato metelli romae fiunt consules ;
i ask it gently -- shall the dustbin hold
a swarm of bees . around the top they cling ,
and a twitter of inimitable birds .
had for their safety , ( much though to their shame )
“ a count was i , of erling ’s race ,
standing at the open doorway ,
there to sport , and there i play ;
and sprightly neighings echo far around ;
not snowy - white nor rosy - red ,
then away ; come , hymen , guide
drooped lower .   scarlet eddied o'er the sand .
with touch - me - nots and bouncing bet ;
oh , ca n't you be content
is backward focussed on the book ,
an ' i ai n't compelled to labor -- i've cached a wad of beans--
where her fancy and income permitted ; new faces ,
her hands shall cling with other hands ,
vvhile with perfidious hatred they pursu'd
strong in the evening and distinct its shade
or if such terror and so great upon our hearts doth lie ,
stretch hands , and bid ye welcome home
wondrous things in golden light ;
say i ; by which quotation there is meant a
with avarice he is withholde .
to se so worthi on as sche ,
drumcliff on culcinne 's strand :
then why should mortal man repine to die ,
well do we know thy pow'r invincible ;
my life was like an aloe flower , beneath an orient sky ,
  commonly called " paddy blake 's echoes " .
i smelled them . . . then there was irresistible disgust .
dann sprengt ' er hinein und führte den ersten stoß ,
where the lawns and pastures be ,
and run o'er all the pilgrimage of time ,
and - sir , shore enugh , them signs
even potent louis trembles on his throne ,
light is the sleep of the old , for they know
thy daughter and thy subiect yeelds to thee .
the gemini , in which dante was revolving in the heaven of the
and suffer it , self - reconciled , to pass !
" there is not a place befitting ,
tears seem to her the natural food
with magnetism of fire , are prest
but -- politics first !
the lonely nightingale is heard .
feebly glows ,
_ is the hunting good , my lover , so good that you hunt alone ? _
mine hands are full of the dust .
great exploits his whom the lord god endows !
confession to his two wives , his dear bed - fellows , ada
behold them granting posts and places
it was a tempting ickle sing !
noples he took , not waiting your command ;
and or ever etain with her golden head
but woldd{es } thow for thy gentry
that folded into thy bosom every sorrow dies .
one who stood sentry on the citadel
not this rock onely ; his omnipresence fills
the better art to know the good from bad :
and the honest , undreading ,
and winked , and laughed , then whispered in his ear ,
lxvi . summons her gods -- three hundred powers divine ,
neutrality is as fine a word
well as the occasional use of such words as _ vidi _ , show that
the plighted faith , the mutual flame ,
no sound or ocean shock ;
frick , los angeles , cal .
or wretched sappho shall behold him more .
of the bright stair 's aerial extent ,
and watch the bridle - tracks .
and to her regal son france homage pays .
i swear the foeman , arm'd for war
still gazing at them through the open door ,
the hemlocks ' shadow , or the pines ' perfume .
and spit on dust that fills your fathers ' graves ?
i hope this little question is no sin ,
why else this double object in our sight
to church she gave , to cloister gave ,
her isthmus idly spread below :
came out alike on the other side .
wear in their dainty livery
lang did they rage and ficht full ferss ,
the nun
to battle with the storm that mars
for he had seen the traveller there before .
at the first blush ; for a fair briton hides
follow the multitude and bind thine eyes ,
  this was the battle in 1259 , in which the florentines routed
or before my prince i will never come near . ’
myself this day will take the field ,
and shows of time -- ne'er break thy peace , nor make
through this pour these pains and tortures ,
that whispers in my heart,--
his chambre be himselve tok ,
not so much honouring thee
in the name of the empress of india , make way ,
the lambs were racing eagerly--
king charles was a horseman that long used the trade ,
o factum male ! io miselle passer !
thy head into a tin - man 's shop ?
the house is crammed : tier beyond tier they grin
that he might treat this girl just as it pleased him .
her eyes are like the sickly moon !
" but , though light - headed man forget ,
it was the good ship _ billycock _ , with thirteen men aboard ,
in the grassy woods of spring ;
we was wrecked last march , in a polar storm
neighbours , or some one going along the street happens to notice
in their bloom ,
at a kaaba olden .
into britain 's fertile land ,
making faint shadows , blending in each other :
to see those towers , and halt to weep![g ]
make me over , mother april ,
and to his enemies terrible .   so replete
nor of the nickname " miss ben , "
to what warm shelter canst thou fly ?
they gathered no more simples there ,
because another has not smiled !
against a solemn day , harnessed at hand ,
tigris and euphrates both beheld ,
here they who merit heaven by worth
the trojans succouring , the battle - field
the new born planet tracks its trial course ;
sweet as on rome 's pyre .... )
shimmered all around me , so white shone those pages ;
i fare as thogh i herde it noght
the partner of thy scorn'd embrace
bot war þe wel , if þ{o}u be waschen wyth wat{er } of schryfte ,
now quench’d for ever in the arms of death . "
with a dear brother , who to preach was sent .
i turned me round , with admiration filled ,
whether christ was born or no ,
gold was the mountain of tallow
why reason made accomplice in the cheat ?
{ artos een toi det ' , eipein themis estin , ekeinos ,
what the magician took , the duke attack .
outgrew herself ; and , in the transport lost .
or dashed and driven in tempestuous flight
there 's a sight that blinds the sun ,
whereon i thus :   " perchance , o ancient spirit !
lothian voice that i repeat it to myself .   let the precisians
but nought of what had happed meanwhile they knew .
should appear to you in that light , i desire that you would
a mighty wave rush'd o'er him as he spoke ,
but one thing haunts me , the old song ,
nay , that would not punish , or save ;
even such as wights of ruddy cheer
“ wretched he stood , just on the spot i point:”--
with long - brew’d malice warm thy languid page ,
giving back the estate of her mother
when with his veins he liberated us . "
marks all my ways , oh with peculiar care
" because he did so yesterday with me ,
all summer on the norman dortar ,
that hunger can not make him rude ,
our earnest wish our lord to greet . ”
by mutual succour more are sav'd than fall ;
and with our friends our common losses mourn . "
scarce from the ground one foot he sprang ,
the death - bed of my little child .
and bring four in his companie ;
where skinner 's sinuous street , with tortuous track ,
the morn had been , to help their dear delight ;
who , at his bidding , bow--
and , transport beaming from his eye ,
he answer'd , " here i found them ; since that hour
this hapless stranger to the city lead :
by no respect or fear ; either thou art
from daśaratha , best of kings ,
have power to stretch them into open space .
and where it stood is set a stone ,
in guid march - weather ,
of cordial , to the cup that is prepared .
but in their faces was the eye bewildered ,
what horror holds me!--god ! that obscene , slow ,
the fatherless child ; so wailed he , ever wailed
our steps .   their silence therefore of our way
now we leave the crowded city ,
and knows his voyage is done ?
beauteous maiden of the northland ,
where slowly winds the stealing wave !
yesterday this day 's madness did prepare ;
of crowns , with which the king thy spouse
fled swiftly with a tearing breeze ;
fair as thy fairest birth ,
though ceres may spread
the emerald spring , the sunshine - awakened spring ,
o tidings of comfort and joy !
the lady takes torrent past the lions , into the castle . ]
ghosts are they underneath the wave ,
sent it with swift rotation like a globe ,
is heard the tramp of his steed as he rides .
the rain is raining all around ,
we turn and see it in the air ,
when the wounds were heal’d , he sprung on sharaz ,
the sun of angels , him , who by his grace
if they insist upon the scripture plan ,
" for as moche as many folke there be
with promise grand ,
with pure and hallow'd weavings grew !
neither you nor i knew there was so much evil in the world .
and taken prisoner . the victory was won by a stratagem devised by
had not the bliss so slow a pace , --
of their arm’d pykes , some sharpning are the pyles ,
  pascal 's thoughts , translated by dr . kennet , 2nd ed . , 1727 , p.
for victory still his fervid spirit burns ;
which , born and nursed through many an anxious day ,
he 's jumped each stile along the glistening lanes ;
saw in one volume clasp'd of love , whatever
and life is sore beset and crieth ` help ! '
so thou , fair planet , not unled ,
but tell me , dear sir , did you lay nothing by
nor hope to void thy countability .
here cease thy vaunts , and own my victory :
and make them happy in some happy plains .
that allures to the quest .
at last the day came for those lords ' return ,
pleas'd it returnd as soon with answering looks
my name 's ran , i wuks in de san ' ;
like the weird cloud of death that falls apace
we sailed into the night ,
and down to the depths of hell
but yet the minced - pie it is
" lovely joan , " said colin bold ,
and drank the sun , while round the breezy height
o sin ! oh sorrow ! and oh womankind !
i saw the summer sunset die
her champions are sleeping beneath the cold sod ;
a madman , kneeling to a thing of stone . "
sailed into the fiery sunset ,
on my errand thee i ’ll send
but theer , liz , be sharp an ' let 's have his surprise .
no natural heat till mine grows cold in death .
incites the timid prayer
as yell 's the bill .
“ and when consulted what the spouse must be
but , alack , my hand is sworn
then the reckless lemminkainen ,
whate'er thy worshipful soft tongue shall say ,
the vertuous fenele it is .
' till clay - cauld death sall blin ' my e'e ,
through the southern windows , narrow and tall ,
which mihte it take and don aweie ,
wind thy horn , my hunter boy ,
again upon the lap of morn!--
he saw they both were tenanted--
the lovely thais , by his side ,
per tot signorum species contraria surgunt
with fond thoughts , & c.
as fowls into the ambush fluttering go .
" he married fortunate . " and others said :
nor that , unless his death can justify
i have discover'd to thee , yet behooves
for thou hast taught me !
and he wore no shroud or cere - cloth
and i to him : " those dulcet lays of yours
*    -- domus albuneae resonantis ,
nor wash in water of remorse 's well ,
the naked earth is warm with spring ,
cynthia 's shining orb was made
may give him bands , biserta to assail ;
and many a hill did lucy climb ,
make common things noble , make vulgar things chaste .
this way and that the snake they drew ,
propose departure from the finish'd rite ,
all under the linden tree .
twain , burdette , nye , and content !
as his own moorish barks , took other thought .
with rocks , and stones , and trees .
nature all vacuums doth decline ;
whence heaping woe on woe he hurried off ,
i will on thy bosom rest ,
immortals bring it into my heart and as i deem it will be
when a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round ,
on , just before me , still to be followed ,
my wife , and , touch'd by the kind cheer
all the hearts of men were softened
that his mov'd mountain - bars own other powers .
until the meeting day .
once more to your door ! ...
let him fill this lowly station ,
engulfed the soul of zeus .
the prickly prong has pierced his skin ,
the rest against the saracens are sent ,
" these lands are ours by charter . if you doubt it , bring
of serpents , and of such a monstrous kind ,
was metamorphos'd to a vine ;
than solitary pride 's oppressive weight ,
for shepherd of the twilight is dismayed at the blade ,
said then the foxe , " but i this doubt will save :
" then waken from long lethargy to life
thine head upon this bosom shalt thou lay ;
what lay beyond the ridge . only they heard
divine honours as a god , under the name of quirinus , one of the
yea , i know him ;
boughs swaying to and fro
one little month shall i sustain
and thunders a jubilant anthem
lifts woody peaks which tigers fill ,
when all was ready , and the courtly dame
among these sightless spirits our senses quail .
that glories in his white ,
the feast , and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment ;
and vengeance stilling all for ever.--
simul duona eorum portant ad naues :
and a soup was distilled in a kettle , that gave
" yes , i suppose you 'll want to , but i should n't .
of passing three days in the exquisite glance
" a little mushroom table spread
no blight nor mildew falls ;
as being tennyson 's , not mine . )
my citizens , stay here ; these are the bounds ;
" fruit to sell , fruit to sell , " cried the woman at the door .
sigh no more , ladies , sigh no more ,
fix'd in the slime they say : " sad once were we
' live for thyself :   thou art not earth 's . '
and in a little , short , unquiet sleep
smelling to his prey ;
sweet dreams shall steep thy slumber deep .
a little sheet for mary 's bed ,
with rage irresolute and whispering plot ,
nullam rem e nilo gigni divinitus unquam ,
she pined for her wisconsin and america .
with steel invades his brother 's life by stealth ;
wizards ( half chorus )
yet i do not exactly intend
to the honeysuckle arbour ,
and under it spread on the voluptuous silt
advanced before the others , he descried
that is , some words of spanish , turk , and greek ,
do sacrifice to the gods , and offer choice hecatombs ? but
all the food they take , you twig :
crimson - eyed we saw him go ,
mind , examining into the natural and political rights of nations ,
still to his promise true . ”
tristia , book iii . , elegy xii .
fierce impulse unto crime !
built up a secret stairway to the height
she straik'd my head , and she kaim'd my hair ,
as now , is mute .   the land , that gave me birth ,
as though the new - come prince had been
ne'er changing till the morrow 's sunlight glow .
resembles much in mien that martial peer .
though they flowed so far apart ,
or knew she was there .
the more they talked , the stronger grew
but the high churchman was a skilled fencer ,
ached furiously , and he must get to bed .
judge of the nations , spare us yet ,
down went the royal george
strong death ! where is thy sting ? ' "
and lo ! forthwith there rose up round about
the wonder - working ring , and eke the wight
_ tell me , thou pupil to great pericles ,
and then they saw me .   swift her gaze was set
he , in the scramble , got a _ wrong one _ .
to find a peaceful shore at last ,
lord , visit them wha did employ him ,
and would we might win to the harbour - light !
life is not life"--
she loves him most as much as me .
dame barbara snatched the silken scarf .
adieu dear comrade ,
our poet , who has taught the western breeze
exulting , and the field was drench'd with blood .
and splashed with fire , purply - black his hair
profound yet touching , sweet yet strong ,
for his revolt , yet faithfull how they stood ,
to pint the people to the goal
she oft proves the top of the tree .
taught him monstrous miracles .
unless you can show this reason ,
and on the dapplled grass ,
monarch , a pagan , probably not favored in philosophical
nor fail'd to wish he could convey them ,
of things beneath the sun ;
and these inferiour farr beneath me set ?
seeing i have a breast in common ,
that vapor dank , returning into water
hath thy far world no fairer path to death ? "
that tossed the dog ,
of mirth the gay tone ,
summons ! the younger is dead !
_ heaven , you say , will be a field in april _
sets forth the sky as in a chart ;
the gliding lethe leads her silent flood .
him in this pressing peril to advise ,
but likewise i will spare for the lord apollo a grace ,
to my young eyes .   then all that man hath done
of all events is aggregated there
of their angelic bells ; methought i heard
“ the gore , when at the sacred altar 's foot
all delicate scruples of justice hurl'd down--
if i may have them back , these fain would sip .
galvanized at times to go
and laughing spoke from the wall :
so much the gathering darkness charmed :   we sat
i 'll be bound ye'll meet again .
of gain engrossed the long laborious days ,
we look before and after ,
to be some inmate of our evil land . "
take your old philosophic way ;
how could a turn of luck have come to thee ?
and could not dance the whole of the way ;
more peevish , cross , and splenetic ,
hast builded on what islands of repose !
inde nunc retrahis te ac tua dicta omnia factaque
doubtful accomplishments . so let it be .
from his true maiden 's breast ,
where lakes and rivers burst upon the sight
e muy grande turbaçion
linger , ere i my loving friends would greet ,
foreign and remote regions , " is there any good fellow from
then blue smoke - haze of the cooking rose ,
raucusque silvarum fragor
for every little wave has its nightcap on ,
sleeps in that tireless tide .
he impales , as with a skewer ,
i am not used to tears at nights
where sunders them the opposite defect .
in vain , in vain , in vain !
malaysian verse , pantoum derived from , 386 .
who , at satan 's instance , proposes the invasion of earth -- are as
what fancies chaste , and loves , that grew
but ellick he sat with his head bent down ,
then first we saw the monster mend his pace ;
waiting for the youthful mistress ,
of demons damn'd , from hell out flung ,
which , breathed upon a man or maid ,
where the banners of thy dead
that " if our lord returned he 'd fight for us . "
beneath her vines preserved a part ,
no , que llega su vez , y ardiendo en ira ,
mine the walnut slopes beyond ,
but victims only , cowed beneath the lash
ennius . he penned the record of your fathers ' mighty deeds .
with a star on your forehead .
with torches beaten we will thrust thee forth .
mankind [ found it ] widely visible , and the king of
knows your soul a sphere , o journeying boy ,
the gentle winds which whisper to the trees
" the song is old and simple that i sing :
virgil . " he soon began to turn the thebais into english , and he
a glance she casts -- then wildly cries
as to my knowledge , there 's no end to't ,
love , the evangel ,
such greens!--how the lord himself loves green !
to every planet point his sundry yeare ,
' tis easy work to be exact ,
why thus recall another 's pain ,
till in the ocean of thy love
askest . lethe thou shalt see , but outside of this ditch , there
hold strangers of a sassenach line ;
will fix a sharp knife to affright mine eye ;
with his great eyes lights the wigwam ?
or truth from foolish memories ;
went back to their waiting mothers ,
or africanus ' : e'en the sun 's itself
i 'll up an ' tend to my true love ! "
so suppliant stood the vánar bands .
and dark cheeks pressed against her own !
let _ oates _ at least be now enshrin'd ;
and tremble .   and i shall know that you have died ,
el pobre ! the cute things his kids had said !
this carries friendship to her noontide point ,
for human love — a baby hand is strong
stalks the corruption of a charnel - house ,
sing from the south - west , bring her back the truants ,
i fling my pebble on the cairn
i ' m naebody noo , though in days that are gane , vol . v. , 182 .
stood up the ancient gables gray
from resignful eve 's adorning
of the forks and crumbs and plates
they threw the gold egg
but first to gather friends , with them t ' oppose
all the waters in the blue - sea
to bless the doors from nightly harm .
twice , poor fool ! i ' ve learn'd to rue ;
" which shall i first praise in singing ,
compress'd , alas ! the thorax ,
and wade in liberty ?
let the battle go on till the nation is saved !
their silence is more eloquent than words ,
and second every stroke columbia aims ,
the swallow summer comes again ,
where savage pirates seek through seas unknown
intelligible to finite mind , things which , even angels fail to
with many a curve my bank i fret
none ever could tell , for she came back no more .
the vehement struggle so fierce for unity in one's - self ;
vanishing with satanic cries ,
then tell them that i won renown
there are others thou canst laugh at ,
and ' twere not fit i should endure
quickly he then drew aside the excellent clergyman , saying :
the ball no question makes of ayes and noes ,
that in every great house keepeth ,
bloomed over near his wheel ;
such is in evil deeds his cunning sleight ,
at the _ bench _ will hard labor repress rhyming fire ,
mine questioned thine with ' why should i be here ? '
our visages are from this tempest free ,
to bless the home which love hath made ?
o lord , that rul'st our mortal line ,
ranged in their beds on the top of the waggon too - heavily laden .
they also begged it very hard itself at home to make ,
that with this trouble she must needs be sought ?
thus low before thee .
filled with the sound of footsteps and that voice
to - morrow make a kite to reach the sky ,
ye unto whom far and near come posting the christian pilgrims ,
marko ’s fate fill’d all his thoughts with sorrow .
with those who think the candles come too soon ,
falls the weeping maiden , aino ,
and all my thoughts of heaven go a - tumblin ' down ter,--well ,
for we do n't know nothink o ' ' orse - flesh ' ere ,
no fancied god , a god indeed , descends ,
in nescientness .
the human flood came pouring with the red flags over all ,
their cords hath he knotted in the earth ,
the stars are sparkling there ;
" you have never , then , heard of my history ? "
one word there was in all , and metre one ,
my burthen , and with pleasant speech and kind ,
take me thither ! she shall be free !
and the blind zeal of a misjudging crowd .
and from the barn hard by was borne
i sent through the forest a rushing blast ,
rested upon the heaving molten gold
but ill for the leader who tries to hold
" rash boy ! the power i serve
thou bid'st me come away ,
still had she of the treasure / of nibelungenland ,
when down along by pleasant tempe 's shore ,
only i , who had work so plenty ,
who hath his life from rumors freed ,
the small flames murmur and flicker and sway ,
this is the sovereign anguish ,
there 's an old story has the same refrain ;
tinkling cymbal of our empty youth .... i shape my course to the
the bobwhite 's voice is calling ;
' why , strike me blind , i 'll come !
the broken body of him that had been christ
how could i e'er desert thee , loveliest nymph !
to own a sympathy with suffering man ,
( morgenlied ) from the german of gesner .
come you , then : call ,
they ask and there is not an answer ;
in the blazing heat of the day ;
with young endymion stays ;
on all thou'st seen , and heard , and wrought ,
to have bit off so rich a receipt for a _ row_;--
vaguely illumining the groping faces .
he faints with hope and fear .   it is the hour .
clergyman and a magistrate , that there has been an increase of
that burns not the whip ,
the bold sir roderick 's bannered pine .
o that mine eyes might closed be , 118 .
lest one like you should carry it away ;
large eyes illumined with her spirit 's light ;
who pant to shine the favourites of a throng .
by vulcan , with close - fitting doors secur'd ;
not a moment stopped or stayed she ,
muttering . the messenger from kirklee priory comes out of the
six the windows in each castle ,
thou art to me but as a wave
that warn't more ' n twenty rod beyond , )
i see them parting at the farm - house door--
that day ye pranc'd wi ' muckle pride ,
the battle marvelous and stern . none such
heart of my heart , right merrily
the vain fancy which many young women have , who permit
then down they pounce , now in , now out ,
mudjeekeewis , that 's the west wind ,
she shiver'd and obey'd .
while , as the sages parted thence ,
and sweeping all his theories to naught :
there was jurfalez , his son and heir ,
the golden morning breaks ;
from bush , and brake , and morning beam ,
von heleden lobebaeron ,    von grozer arebeit ,
and the venus rose enchanted
obedient to my will , because i serve
wrought with pilaster , bay , and balustrade
as is a widow,--still , as she
that he the gem might be
who gave us life , to bless that life bestowed !
the science of english verse .   crown 8vo , pp . xv , 315 .
but that the heart of youth is generous,--
for silent , low , on beds of dust ,
soan - ge - ta'ha , strong - hearted .
daylicht has mony een .
then weened eke the lady / it should his vantage be ,
slant showers may wound , sharp winds bereave--
to set the bow for the wooers and the axes of grey iron .
" my soul hath cleaved to the dust , " i heard
diana bound the tyrants of the wild ;
would clothe the soul with all the christian graces ,
born of a thoroughbred english race ,
_ aeneas _ ... with joy
the truth is from those people , who aver
grey hulks in a greyer sea .
her plain print gown , prim cap , and bright steel chain
we ran on the snow - crust like fleet nimble deer ,
and some to grub down peter stubbs his mark ,
of peace , where gospel - truth 's protest
shadow , fore - doom of death ,
though thine the palm of peace , the victor 's crown ,
and the poodle dog a yowling ,
tempers her words to trampling horses ' feet
the drink - horns emptied soon ;
or grecian scrip to rise ;
around this quiet home , and they
and hid in the shade of the house his impotent anger and shame .
i own the fondness to be blest ,
who changed him into a scarabæus , or winged beetle . flying to the
before , deep fix’d , the eternal anvils stand ;
to tempt or punish mortals , except whom
make me salute the dawn . nor may the hymn
oh piteous soul ! with none to care ,
like some outpost over chaos--
and then i trust in my courser tall ,
through wood and dale the sacred river ran ,
and now they pick the bishop 's bones ;
and halitherses , hero old , the son
beneath the gracious noontide 's tranquil beams,--
the hands of moses appear like froth upon the bough ,
virgo est ’ is translated by clarke , ‘ so is the god and the young
and other gods shake those refulgent vaults
on planting the apple - tree . "
cause of the hazard , for these negligences and ignorances , though
and if thou must be sometimes munching mouse ,
the nature of the woman to the man ;
can loosen thee as lazarus ,
of naked spirits many a flock i saw ,
darkness . he admired their harbours , ships , places of assembly ,
a slayer , watching whilst they slowly bore
and it was liberty to stride
from gloom of undiscoverable scope ,
that glided through your gloomy hall .
down to the beach i ran to meet him ;
to me a language that no man can teach ,
flecked with purple , a pretty sight :
should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
she perished in a ditch ) .
their merciless wrongs .   here alexander dwells ,
so the wife of asan turns to meet him ,
what do i not for thy dear sake !
than one week -- here the story closes ;
the rope i pull is stiff and cold ,
and drunk the milk of paradise .
‘ and will not let our merchants ’ ships
thither came eke siegmund / where the strangers he did see ,
sed proles semelae bacchus doctaeque sorores
she quells the floods below--
evidence of having been thrown off at white heat , still more had
thwarting you and bounding ;
sleep in the darkness .
rest thy weary feet to - night ?
yea , from their ears the women brake the rings
and mourn'd till pity 's self be dead .
then off to where a new invites you !
and cruel as the grave is jealousy !
moral and divine poems lovelace has some verses in the lucasta .
his face at whose right hand doth reign
when thou snarest me a bird 's egg
have , devoted yours .   were my worth greater , my duty would show
jove 's daughter , reconciled to his embrace .
and mark yon meeting of the sun and sea ,
then the hero , lemminkainen ,
and , shed reluctant from the trees ,
engarlanded with cranes at play ,
torrent prays to christ , spears the first dragon ; ]
first gave you form ! hence ! lest the muse should deign ,
the helmet and the helmet - feather
of honour and purse .
henceforth i 'll rove where busy ploughs
a bird piped in the roses and there came
unto a neighbor she must go ,
he feeds yon almshouse , neat , but void of state ,
is now the hatefulest , commonest group of men ,
from those his arts so cunning / had he of strength such store
the two white crosses , one at each grave 's head ....
and mid - may 's eldest child ,
a knot of friends , where i cou'd trace
curious , the streets had i , but anxious wish'd
cast to the billows .   rather had i died
at rouen , in the market - place ,
gold - crowned and singing ; every hour i stood ,
cur me querelis , etc .
on the rocks her silken stockings ,
this here job 's no bed of roses ,
which would have made me full amends
we have not been able to find the _ magazine of magazines _ or the
' henceforth , no earthly hope with heaven shall share
full five hours ' grace to shrive our souls with prayer .
safe in her father 's princely halls
till the sun and moon changed places ,
what heed from out eternity ,
not e’en the self - existent lord ,
yet , on the thorn , i heard a blackbird sing ....
poor people , whom the stranger - thief hath terrified with war .
they pass from dreamy bliss to wakeful glee ,
the romans are a kind and cordial race ,
if i ’d awhile to wait .
" doth not intensely burn to know ,
my fond frail happiness out of me .
bertha thrust one foot into the water , but drew it out instantly ,
to fury it seemed , heeled like an avalanche
and follow you about like cats and dogs .
visions of heavenly splendor denied to fastings and vigils .
i love young colly - flow'rs if stew'd in cheese ,
all in love is meant ;
and the serai 's impenetrable tower
the steeds , that startle at his sounding arms .
thought concerning me , for i desire only to see you happy . "
or bright - shaken hair , that showers
to all that music interfused
i wonder if , dim centuries ago ,
the vale of nature , where it creeps and winds
i find myself in the valley ,
so fair a bloom from vanquished winter won .
to him the son of telamon replied .
and , upon my word , i really do n’t see why he should n’t .
_ all hail ! _ to those twain , and went rushing to the darkness
yet a blessing shall remain
mars quoque deprensus fabrilia uincula sensit :
nor a snap to his eyes ,
and the forests hear and answer the sound .
ye gave me cakes and lollipops and pretty toys a score --
and left his sister lone in grief amidst the foe to speed ,
swaying no sceptre of grief .
the low and dulcet lyre of spring ,
and he looked in the face of the man ,
- so push you out of harbour in small craft ,
but seeing flora 's gentle pace ,
like the fire - beetle 's back ;
touch boyhood 's passions with the breath of flame ,
powers to their creatures is expressed by the love of a mother to
of all who strive and toil . the things i had
into myself i retreat for shelter , and there , in the silence ,
we , too , have had your monarch by the nose ,
went echoing wide around the earth
roll thyself into a circle ,
though disappointment , like a morning cloud ,
build it up from earth to heaven ,
geist 's grave                                _ matthew arnold _
turn'd all her shrinking lidless eyes
each creature seeks his den ;
many and strange adventures would be found ;
in the ancient times a mother
why hire they not the town , not every thing ,
his elephantine bulk to fit ,
choti tinchaurya , lovely and tender ,
and shades eternal settle o’er his eyes .
to know how this may be . "
on the swift maelstrom of the eddying world
thus to his only son foreseeing spake .
and away , and away , where the forest trees wave ,
" to whom with sighs : ' i pass these dreadful gates
high and low , all must go :
that the parents grow purple and livid ,
he seemed in a fret there was nobody sick ,
whence , from a certain spot , its winding flood
a little while , and all their power is fled ;
until we hear the hour of ten
breathed back again .
on the hilt the bright stars twinkle ,
familiar objects , grown severe ,
steal some star out of the sky ,
if there be none , never mind it .
welcome -- for you do not visit me often ?   say what you want ; i
wing'd with their owne wild ecchos , pratling fly .
charles , perjured traitor , for his part ,
but one mortal ne'er will waken .
where in their sleeping - bags they sleep !
the song that led those marching feet
soft chestnuts , and of curdled milk enow .
and now and then , when in those moods that turn
therefore , i pray you , kindly permit me to see him . "
on athens ' earth , zeus of the market place
so closed for ever faithful argus ' eyes !
vainly and helplessly his ill - luck blamed .
dark and inert my mouth ,
the introduction and the spread of light .
one self - approval in his heart of hearts .
he searcheth vale , he searcheth height .
i may not go to - night to bethlehem ,
pebbles swim upon the big - sea ,
" here , " said the patriarch , no more doomed to range ,
" this plain epistle told no more
banish all thy cares and sorrows ,
never leave it till it 's done ;
i would be ever as to - night ,
wiser folk who think they spy
for we are the same that our fathers have been ;
as is eternally her name !
when the impregnate air retains the thread ,
then themis , trembling for them , swift as thought
hath shown that men are more disposed to suffer ,
but the little red house could n't say a word .
he knew , as well , the kindly heart ,
the ox he openeth wide the doore ,
with all the powers of war . nought but he dares .
i 'll never be a lap dog , licking dirty feet ,
voices in laughter , too ; and body 's pain ,
its storms expire in water - drops ; the eye
frail as the flower , and fleeting as the gale ,
the redbreast pours his sweetest strains
a general famed and bold ,
to pay their debts , or keep their faith , like kings ?
on warring ways , or bear himself as king latinus ' foe ?
i know that all beneath the moon decays ,
“ deny'd , the furious bulls with flaming breath
confusion most prevails , such deaths are dealt
first stirred the tide of song ;
since your unvanquished hardihood is spent .
la patria , ove regnasti , ancor ' e serva .
but from this child too swift a doom
from gorgeous wrongs in false array ,
suddenly , ere she understood at all
imputed , the fair dame return'd : " of me
" who is that ill - omened woman -- that with maniac - staring eyes ,
kisses and starts and wooings of the boughs !
shold haue proceedinges from soe slender throats ;
oh no , i thank you .   i am not a stranger
vingolf ( floor of friends ) . freyja 's dwelling .
yet disregarding action 's fruits -- be friendly ,
and that by right that he
seeing the air 's face is not so delicate
round the corner as my friend came up , fell
the warm rose opened for the moth to sleep ;
τραγικοὶ , ἐπὶ τοῦ οἰκτροῦ · so hesych . μέλεος ' μάταιος . ]
i wept not , i within so turned to stone ;
thee on and never turn ,
that slipped my simple fingers through
and rested from her labours .
yet each presumes his works will rise ,
as we went driving on through the cold starry night .
so woefully she sigh’d .
straightway rushes to her dwelling ,
and if they wolde graunte , as god forbede ,
at some hotel where lovers dine
sure if spring is in the air his hedges are abloom ,
my master called him _ jacobite _ ! )
till good josiah drove them thence to hell .
we now saw the enemy bearing ahead ,
well to lady gotelind was known her husband 's mind .
are in the passage , packed and labelled ;
great is the golden cat who treads
a kind of final cause : —
v. 77 .   taddeo . ]   a physician , of florence .
they mind't na wha the chorus teuk ,
that poor retention could not so much hold ,
thet last word pricked him like a pin ,
leaps the echo , and round and round
of some lone precipice or ledge . "
and saw nestor , who took me to his house and treated me as
in scenery or machinery , poet .
and which souls that are songless can never enjoy ;
care not for your jests and laughter ;
" they both are here to bid you shun
did i say , all ? no ! one was lame ,
carven temple 's seat .
o be to me henceforth but some sweet dream
till he found an aspen standing ,
kill for us a deer with antlers ! "
whatsoever the master orders , come what may :
and not a sound or murmur broke
the stars come out ; the fragrant shadows fall
the wilted leaves are blown away ,
longe sunt tamen a uera ratione repulsa .
should paris slay the hero amber - hair'd ,
from many an eyelid , pity presses
small service is true service while it lasts ;
musical cherub , soar , singing , away !
o heaven ! in evil strait this day i stand
arouse , my friend -- let vivid fancy soar ,
how long in woman lasts the fire of love ,
the woods and fields to pleasing toils invite.--pope . ]
" sir charles " , i.e. sir thomas charles bunbury , bart . ,
on the grass they play ;
cuyo cántico sonoro
to a beautiful fancy - dress ball .
an ’ both his drum ends must be solid as stone ,
or look made her heart waver . many she heard ,
the dial he constantly watches ; and when
of vision now along that ancient foam ,
i have the bitterest pain . '
gay without good is good hearts greatest loathing .
  this is the teaching of the dhyana sect .
the splendour of the skies .
torn by convulsions from its native place .
his aweless father 's honour and renown .
it is a place monastic , set above
what needeth then apologies be made ,
ringing the bells till they rocked the steeple ;
nothing whatever did it say to us ,
greatly complained ;
these are my heralds , and behold ! my name
said with the others , " holy , holy , holy ! "
nor ever more the friend shall find ,
murdered in every home with merciless hands
business manager of the journal , mr . george c. hitt , privately
then wanted to borrow , a favour her aunt
when he left me , he kiss'd me -- and said , my sweet dear ,
marching , marching .
joy into song -- the blithe arcadian faun
and we forgot the bitter lot
fell once for all , and , dying , bit the ground .
which , like the stars , though clouds obscure them , beam
plumes of bright birds , rhinoceros ivory ,
and with the kings mayne battell vp doth beare ;
v. 127 .   harsh was the grating . ]
this to your coyness i will tell ,
perpetuos in carmine fastos .
death often at the cobbler 's stall
and lost columbia swells our breasts no more .
you with your glances ,
the misers can not carry to the grave
earth heard and trembled at thy strains of fire :
his haughty , spangled hems ,
my business is just now with kings ;
and left them in amaze ; and up the stair
but , gray with dust , and overgrown with weeds ,
who is built , as you may notice , on a most ingenious plan .
only to sail beneath our native sky ?
o ye rich men hear and tremble ! for with words the sound is rife :
would come uncall'd for ) but to live by law ,
this drooping flower of youth thou lettest fall
proceeded thereafter divers streams wherewith the catholic garden
where the mists roam ,
may ben enformed hou it stod ,
and the far waste of rhythmical water ,
yet , like a hamden , pleads ierne 's claims .
as good bell - wethers always do .
all in a chaise and pair .
dead to all shames , forgotten of all glories ,
i dare not court the youthful muse ,
my own sad self gazed up at me--
and the big one wanders through it .
and still as fast as he drew near ,
and it shall burn the sight out as with fire .
of motionless cloud ; and at my feet
we link them to the work of him
at anchor from all storms of mental strain ;
so each day begin again .
que á fuego y sangre , de insolencia ciego ,
disguise ev'n tenderness , if thou art wise ;
in his banquet , makes phaedrus say :   " love is confessedly amongst
brune , elle fut jadis vantée entre les brunes ,
" by allah and by ali , death shall seal
i 'm an old man , but i can swing a scythe
it all confesses ; and that judge severe
oh queen ! may the gods grant this prove the worst .
see that in thought , in deed , in word ,
who bestialized herself in bestial wood .
the answer is heavy with pain :
can not watch thy son and hero ,
the words of wisdom . i have an ancient woman of an
in thy abysses hide
to wake in dark minds a bright image of christ--
longings of your heart .
all the sweetness seemed to grow and grow ,
what thou hast brought in the beginning and what thou
` now , my good eem , for goddes love , i preye , '
nor thought of pampá ’s lovely brook ,
" wilt thou be one with me ? "
some lost love 's eyes are dim before they shine
stupid brains , while one might count
no blemish on the sense of beauty broke ,
quid statuat de te sine te deliberat ille .
sweeping down with his fifty rowers ;
these eyes have seen him ; chief , when to the ships
the mouse delights to nibble cheese ,
yet , ah !   what terrors frowned upon her fate --
guided by pallas , with successful aim ,
beasts and base straw : already is the streame
'll go to work raisin ' pr'miscoous ned , "
as knowing that the waiting eyes which scan
the curse wherewith i cursed him because the good was dead .
( through all your painting ) showes you your true face .
some day when i 've had lots to eat ,
" gae , fetch a web o ' the silken claith ,
i vow an offering at thy shrine , a young
" nay ; there 's no madness in it ; thou shalt find
patience , that thou mayst have thy time with me ;
their day of liberty for ever set .
and the sea rises higher .
" unless , " he murmured , suddenly inspired to madness , " unless---- "
and baby lips than love , she 'll find ,
this is my city springfield ,
o fugitive fragrances
and the lips of no man uttereth love ,
thou idle singer of an empty day !
his wrath flamed out -- but betty stood ,
we 're cooking watery soup for beggars .
heifers with unprotected
the poor father , who heard only a small part of the sentence -- the
strange as a streak of sunset to the moon ,
with thee i travailed not in vain ;
' farewell , sweet sister , ' parted all in tears .
and in careering whirlwinds mount the sky .
that , nigh to yours , it may be read
of evil attend thee !
sma ' siller will relieve me .
for god will find us , each one in his grave .
we have to _ jump _ when papa 's sick .
not sainted martyrs ' sainted song ,
for great and many are the griefs we bear ;
have felt the torment of another 's grief .
what i speak , and what i tell thee ,
and kitchen 's small :
and rustling like autumnal leaves
spoke to the king in words of rage :
and left the palace of the king ,
the long savannahs of the blue ;
the sacraments have been reduced to two
in _ august _ ’s dry and parching heat ;
mute outwardly , yet inwardly i said :
who bare him painfully halting to the shore
success in equal balance hovering hangs .
the miller was hung upon fish - gate , bosodown ,
his chief delight
our door , on a damp , low hillock , the white
that i am a ' day hummin ' , " quo ' she ;
and holds man from his god apart .
than we mortals dream ,
lingered the leaders by towers of flame :
prevailed not on the heart of aegisthus , for all his good
fastidiosus : sed timor et minae
is not more glad to get home to supper , after having been long
what have you for your toil and pain ,
while yet the patriarch lived , who ' scaped the flood ,
but if too swift of foot he flies before ,
place , is enquiring into all these evil deeds and preparing a
for my secret heart has learned the truth
the ship , but i must go , for i am most urgently bound to do so . '
to argue over who was wrong , who right ;
now heav'n in all her glorie shon , and rowld
it last , and spak'st that prophecy of pain ,
thine is the scent of bursting bud ,
a quaint machine that can assume
which makes so many poets , and some fools :
may ruin on thy boldness wait!--
her countenance is unlading the load of bashfulness , such was
of fevers , fractures , humors ,
those two had their hearts full laden .
and everich be himself merveilleth
as widely different from the heart 's domain
vitch voke soosh hopes und fears ,
yoru no tsuyu .
while carols sound , the night to cheer ,
will clear by - and - by .
breathe her breath and drink her sighs to the honeyed
hot curses to himself and turns the paper
dankwart , thane right valiant , / stood without the door
only she ever sickened , found repulse
frank as ten years ago when knighted first .
not stormy _ julia _ , when her swelling pride
or fetch me back that cloud again
with lustre false and fleeting
though ' twould be much if thither he repaired ,
of all their joys to be,--
when the hunger - pain was gnawin ' there ,
continually . but telemachus ( for as yet he believed not
then by sampáti ’s counsel led ,
onaway ! awake , beloved ! "
within the trenches , but a voice was heard
war , death and havoc in these hands i bear . "
by right of war , whate'er his business be ,
for lo ! the stone is rolled away--
near me , abroad , at home , by day and night ,
mana 's maiden thus replying :
the western tide crept up along the sand ,
great was the joy in every breast .
as thou livest here,--until ungentle disease , which thou
' at he seea fine a sample sud dispense
that you should take upon yourself the duty
by impulse of those atoms ' unseen blows ,
or were he reckoned slow
they do not seem to mind the dark
and no sunbeams burn ?
that round about him her fair arms she wreathed ;
than any other possession , for all possessions are fleeting . '
because -- such was his magic power to please--
and phalanx after phalanx , every chief
too often , in that silent court of yours--
in such strange freedom by .
in the folds of nights of autumn ,
now to the sangamon fameless
that he come unscathed / home from brunhild 's land . "
how long d ' you cal'late
sing to the breezes passing by ,
fair ;
“ to thy brother a ship from off the wave ,
ah ! gleam and gloom must ever meet ,
in all thy need be thou possess'd
almost since man from paradise was driven ;
so long , neere lost my sight .
and in the dust be equal made
let heaven decide our fortune , fame , and life . "
of the court - day , and count ursus ,
since the world began .
beyond all other things there beacons me
' and then these colors . . . but who would dare describe them ?
struggling with terror , turn'd to view the straits ,
and tho ' , as time gathers his clouds o'er our head ,
wild beast in the forest that could get away from him when he
here spercheus came , whose banks with poplars wave ;
when seraph lays are warmed by love ,
called " work , " must sentence pass ,
mother dear ?
herde i myn alderlevest lady dere
for he knew whose passions gave her life ,
seeks a vain excuse , he rode away .
called antonius by another name
but love , which spite himself , he entertained
for thy youths they love the bygone widows ,
now happy , to our fathers ' town this answer back we bear ,
but blest above all days since i was born :
and called to ráma from afar :
had watch'd,--so watch'd , since daylight left the air ,
certain as to dates , but believe he left the university in the
_ melvie _ , to soil with meal .
a loved mother murmured in days that are dead ,
for the memory of their heroes and the old swords on the wall .
mi ydwyf eurddeddf ddiofn yn nhrin
not least of western rivers , sicoris
the outlandishman came o'er the sea , o'er the sea ,
if once thy soul hath seized it . the unknown
' tis thus , possessing wealth , we shiver poor
and bleeding head us thro ' the troubles of the sea .
these words , attended with a shower of tears ,
three - fingered hoover stated that he 'd great deal ruther go
while the dewy morn was young ;
to vision ; or as the iris lights
the traders sat by their full bazaars ;
unferth spoke up , ecglaf his son ,
they will not yet suffer me to join those that are beyond the
how sweet it would have tasted ,
the starlings on their wings are borne abroad ;
then on the pillared stone
ah , maiden sweeter than morn 's nectared breath ,
he and his bride were alone at last
i 'll buy my daughter 's children things
an ’ th ’ lads at wur in that puddin exploit ,
look round , lorenzo ! see the reeking blade ,
and crisp with frost the stubble land .
but blacker fa ' awaits the heart
on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in front of the
in the virgin 's snow - white fingers . '
eyelashes black , delicate , equal in beauty , and dark eyebrows--
rise solemn in the tree ,
that friend of mine !
you made me what i am the people say ;
great ropes of gorgeous vapor twist and turn
now in his rage that sword he felt
clickety clackety , good little girl ! "
guiana , whose great citie geryons sons
mutual worship of conscious grace ;
that would point him to the highway ,
psittacvs , eois imitatrix ales ab indis ,
a summons to proclaim ;
which in one moment , like the blast of doom ,
and leave us but the tears !
rock me to sleep , mother,--rock me to sleep !
that wild , unquenched , deep - sunken , old - world pain--
that maybe he can grow an inch in size !
at our assassins ' hands ; beseech them build
frangitur et uacuo crure tument genua .
with curious art . then , placing in his hand
and did i want him to -- or would i rather
i sit alone against the wall
our doom was sealed , by a capricious judge
before thy saving kiss !   my own , my own ,
how in distant lands and ages
binding , clasping , crowning all,--
and the rabbit told a gnome .
likewise to have partaken of his cowardice ; for he gave notice of
and the mariner says , what cheer !
roll something large and round
then turn'd toward them , cause behind thy back
and , half perceiving that thou half perceiv'st ,
in equal scorn of labours and of gold .
milanion nullos fugiendo , tulle , labores
who gave him rude dismission ; he in wrath
next him , the bravest , at their army ’s head ,
and before the nostrils of night , the shuddering hunter of men
salutes and kindly cheer , ensue of course ;
my strength shall rust no longer here . "
my pain will grow -- who then shall lead my host
hemp - seed , harrowing it with anything you can conveniently
to thee , born in the purple of the throne ,
and wide blue eyes . the semblance of a smile
then the fire - haired steed of juutas ,
she is kneeling in the sunshine with the radiant glory o'er her ,
the dead have done with pain :
didst bound
yet to the example of that prince
with the low broad hat of the tann'd
begging her vote and interest in heaven--
why does it please thee so , perfidious lord ,
and even years we journeyed on , regretting never once
the merie soun , which is to like ,
full on the scornful hearts of those ,
in domes as guide to those whose cry
and loud we heard macpherson call ,
to wear the day , and though his heart the death of men dismays ,
still with his burning grief oppressed
or dare to plead , in times like these ,
step by step , up its sylvan hollow , slow ,
semo perduti , e sol di tanto offesi
beauty , aroma , honey at heart ,
a holy hush is on the air
crashing down the face of the precipice ,
still swayed and tottered in the air ,
came first , and then after him , accompanied by the swineherd ,
each town shall hear the rumour of the foe ,
save where the beetle wheels his droning flight ,
so round ulysses , sage in council , press'd
break not his holy musings ! innocence
by this right hand and conscious night i swear ,
see the philosophies all , christian churches and tenets see ,
to kiss thy lips from which it flows ! "
the convention of cintra was signed in the palace of the marchese
pishnekuh , the brant , were sailing ;
they passed to their children the hoarded gold ,
the harmonies of that enchanting song ,
pushed his boat upon the waters ;
to wrestle with the guilty and the vain ,
out of his bed aros fulofte ,
with eyes not raised above my fellow - men .
and serves their majesties well ;
be content , my little friend ,
winds , unthrottle the wolves of war !
but mary call'd then , as st . ambrose saith .
surely a devil 's land when that meant death for each !
he 's been in the army four years , he wants a good time ,
britain 's record : what she has done for the world .   by e. keble
from shore to shore , and gird the solid world ;
and gave the leper to eat and drink ,
and , for the little songster 's nest ,
the goodly , sainted elder made the cave ,
that thou or he would take me to the dead ,
when nelly lightly skipt the stile ,
new - born , the bridegroom and the bride ,
at joust and torneament ; then marshal'd feast
arrows and spread healing herbs . "
+ health+ i will forgiue or els i were to blame
bread of the angels , oil which one here subsists , but never
from some impenetrable shield .
through the dead smoke of myriad sacrifice;--
' turn , fortune , turn thy wheel and lower the proud ;
ye minds that loiter in these cloister gardens ,
interpreting the scheme divine ,
rocked the sledge , the way was shortened ,
nor let god 's building nobly wrought
if i were a shepherd
and each one close against the cliff is seated . "
nor bid me to maids that are younger repair ,
i could have warned you , but you are young ,
tyaesaes ye me told , i knewe no thyng ,
till she her brightest lightnings round revealing ,
i 'm tellin ' ye , doctor , he gars my flesh creep ,
and murmuring to the shades the soul retires .
at something rather felt than seen :
our distant faces reappear .
ino , iii .
the fruit is dead , and yet the leaves be green ;
beethoven zeigst , und seinem willen nach
( x. ) rustum , the " hercules " of persia , and zal his father , whose
more logical . ( dobell 's ' prospect of society ' , 1902 , pp . xi , 2 ,
the voice of the many sounds feebly through one ;
virgil -- publius vergilius maro -- was born at andes near mantua , in
the triple task -- the sword not sought in vain ,
" they in this art , " he cried , " small skill have shown ,
were all to - ruffled , and sometimes impaired .
it matters not how strait the gate ,
magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo .
sat down in the farthest corner ,
me ; this , then , being the prize that you are contending for , i
i think of hoary old stamboul ,
was my reply , " if fame be dear to thee ,
to see the heroe she so much admir'd ;
to put between me and my native land
of ducklings , small and callow :
of moloch homicide , lust hard by hate ;
non dubius moriturus hospes .
now the once blue , laughing sky
so alone , so wretched .
careless of me dost breathe all peace and rest ,
and the wood in unwonted echoes rang
and , as they catch the glance in rows arise
horsley , with a bearing arrow ,
a love so violent , so strong , so sure ,
agony , and a spirting shredded limb
and youths before their fathers ' eyes upon the death - bale laid :
tigers with tigers never have debate ;
for that no better fortune / here await us may ,
so daily at the door they rang ,
with harmony divine . _
new leaves will dance on high -
know her a cousin of thy race ,
and check me not -- this hour divine
underneath the war encampment
to such the gentle murmurs of the main
the royal youths no more could spy ,
to set them on king carle and on his french .
' midst life 's changing scenes , i most happily found
made a fox of scarlet color ,
here , where with jovial and unclouded brow ,
through all the camp and inward raced the scouts
drunken and grim , with shout and yell
in endless speculation , and adore ?
winter is worn that was the flowers ' bale .
a land of giants shall his eyes behold ,
from a poor and humble dwelling ,
exhausted with long vigils , thus the queen
by thirty hills i hurry down ,
but grief intolerable at that word
but bend thee to the task--
and close to land was she .
secretly from the hoary deep , the host
these leaves will perish when away
both keel and mast . not undesired by me
if you 're one who _ in loco _ ( add _ foco _ here ) _ desipis _ ,
and take better care of your youngest sister ,
soft glancing round , i mark a holy light ,
their astrolabes are wrecked with rust .
toss'd by rude tempest through a war of waves ;
the waters waft it , and the nymph receives .
who saw them fall in that blind swirl
but men hard - palmed from tallying - on to whips ,
something to waken wonder . never sky
but glad is the lip of its whisper ;
- not a creature cares in lodi
to cheer with kind words spoken ;
across the river to the garrison
_ bousing _ , drinking , making merry with liquor .
‘ well thee gretith the proude sheryf ,
the breath of heath and furze
whoe'er betrays for ever is consumed . "
rubbed him also in the middle ,
how in their play the poor estray
the times of powdered belles and beaux ;
they hold their fragrance still , a blood - red cone
since all were undeserved ! should i obey ?
and the torrent that falls , faintly heard from afar ,
society , friendship and love ,
he beckoned to king robert to draw nigher ,
distracting thoughts and many an anxious care ,
o'er - vain of his firstling lines .
all eyes upon the minyae were bent ,
misled to think i had betrayed his castle ,
they were silent suddenly .
mine ! do you hear it , silver moon ,
gave him a clawing to some tune--
what good should follow this , if this were done ?
of incense breathing up the well - wrought toil .
i was so hungry i had a vision :
we need not rake its ashes o'er again .
as long as bele lived the earl each year
luz , peñascos , torrentes y cascadas ,
a dark blue zone or bandelet ,
the broken moon appeared .
and yet doth ever flow aright .
ready eke to lose it , / if she may not be my wife . "
we only know what time of year
  " nature is the art whereby god governs the world , " says
... neghbors they turned out , at last ,
on to the light ,
from the cool spring where they drank ;
down the hurrying world went i ;
led them on .
a rumour as of buried ages waking ,
things , such as i may fear without more proof
i wish that i might see them ,
he does not know , as he scrambles along ,
for now -- besides that the infuriate peer
in wheat , and many drew their coin and left
elsewhere , " shouted antinous . " if you say more i will have you
( i wish't i ' ad ' i m ' ere to deal wiv now !
speak ! or thou diest!--yet , that brow , methinks
till that ugly old cat - fish gulped all of them down .
bot fals fantu{m}mes of fendes , formed with handes
were so called from the verb ‘ torqueo , ’ ‘ to twist , ’ from their
nearly full she was robbed .
and a touch of the london swank .
however deep the pit and heaped the clay--
should he wish the gold of battle . "
and , dearer far than anything ,
and sought to buy at lordly price
and when i came , she stood , alone
his father 's phantom stood , and speaking , seemed to say :
in summer he used to be shaved
what can one hand do ' gainst a world of wrong ?
that breaks and dies .
namque animam caelo reddimus , ossa tibi .
a turban strange adorned his tresses hoar .
and while the wretched maid hung down her head ,
had a white throat and a blue e'e ,
another heart that beat for freedom stopped,--
it , for that self - acknowledged reason , and that he
what harm did we to any man
we 'd bofe in heaben wake .
so he spake , mildly ; sohrab heard his voice ,
and grasping , break , if possible , the lance
as a birth - mark on the forehead
to mix forever with the elements,--
what bugle have you heard ?
autumn winds whirl thistledown round and round upon a road . it
thou hadst said they lived , and floated on the breeze .
how that a kinges swerd is bore
so , by the hands of tydeus ' son laid low
boldly she sings and loud for half the day ;
' tis in proportion as men 's lives are great ,
terrible as the lightning rush'd he down ,
the fiddler knows what rueing
of pergamus , her father in his car
to rivet my attention .
or why it leapt , but so ' tis ,
brisk methinks i am , and fine , ii . 134 .
my rested eyes i mov'd around , and search'd
the antagony of matter
she kissed him , shivering as though doubting still .
dawns the veil'd moon of nuptial love .
i ’d a villain — worse than nero,—i’d a most superior hero :
these the words the sea - king uttered :
and forth into the halle he strawhte ,
lines , usually having the rime - scheme _ abbaacca _ .
" seigneurs barons , " began the emp'ror carle ,
round the gentle face , where a deep blush glowed , as , kneeling at
his glance when first we met was keen ,
on came the go - cart down the grade
the spring is alive ,
therefore no words !
that doth torment me more e'en than this bed .
but there were dreams to sell
we do not value them a feather . "
while _ pug _ , still determined to give her a scraping ,
o'ermastered him .   this , with much spoil beside ,
was purified from that which tends to smother
but they never come now together ,
the desert dust was dark and close around ;
it caught the sergeant 's eye , and quick
a chill blast , as from wintry wing ,
then , pallas chased the cloud fall'n from above
back in to abysmal darknesses are hurled .
' twas early on a summer morn ,
and vapouring forth their self - important views ,
but when she came back
and part they ate , and part , in play ,
and who doth on his steps attend ?
belonging to the mollah 's subtle craft ,
for how can he be rich , who ' midst his store
at least to one vague terror , gave relief :
we to the bulging haunch had made descent ,
that does not hear his mother 's song ;
but , ' mong the many tales they tell us ,
the moon seems like a docile sheep ,
hostiliu ' contra
a rose leaf round thy finger 's taperness ,
of thanks and praise an endless fountain ,
hide tear - wet faces on my soft brown breast ,
there ,
the thing that was my boyhood woke in me--
smiling ; and , where the orbing ripple plays ,
is for the wench a deal too good .
to spain , and lead her to the lofty seat ;
seems to be blowing . almost i have heard
that my hands grope , my eyes go blind .
and there upon his images he cast
into the forest older , darker , grayer ,
next , before the beholders , two great brawny shoulders ,
show !
ne'wa .    a river of finland .
nor slight the warning sound :
ivy , sprig of , with tendrils           _ assiduous to please . _
and then once more the youth began
who with winged haste , he deems , will thither run ,
so that she may hear and then
recorded on a pane of glass . ]
where other rocks , crags , cliffs , and mountains stood ,
and through the town , where’er she gazed ,
to the dwellings of wainola ,
or , brooding o'er her thin eggs , sits ,
to save the offence of charitable , flour
the encount'ring legions fighting hand to hand
by mortals made for benefits received !
while backward from the hunter 's eyes
who , at death 's reeking altar , like furies , caressing
who on heavy morning clouds
ochon the day !
poetry of byron . chosen and arranged by matthew arnold .
and schop anon for his passage ,
this i saw when the rites were done ,
until the soaring lark
and hearty in its vehemence ,
the fiery sign on the dark tower wreathes and flares . . .
and spreads its ruin on the mountain side .
and i 'm his bride !
e'en the boy upon the burning
declined on the nun 's gentle bosom .   she saw
from earth to heaven , from heaven to earth ;
an orphan you were
and in that glorious war much suffered he ;
the cross and victor 's wreath emboss'd in gold :
spins a cocoon of this secondary life .
matures her fruits , to make them fall .
save -- she was generous and her foe was crushed .
i did not see .
steel - grey and black with edges red as blood ,
on whose youthful walls the padre saw the angel 's golden reed ;
covering his shame from his offended sight .
kind o ' pr'miscoous i go it
this now could last no longer ; thence must they forward fare .
they will cry again
than my sonne 's wife , elizabeth .
hark ye , norsemen , hear great tidings :
some say god was tired when he made it ;
vvherewith shee inuocates great _ nemesis _ ,
here , here the slaves and prisoners be
disappearing in what is called the saxon current .
and authors thought their reputation safe ,
son - in - law , and he will show you like honour with his own dear
thus the merry pau - puk - keewis
for one you bore in joy and hope , and planned
all of it spent ;
the waters roam no more .
home -- home ! where is that land ?
one vánar yet could find a way
and with thy justice to draw rein on men of wilful ways ,
that named himself the star of evening , stood .
after the truth against the present life
and so he bar him that he slowh
looked forth , and saw the wretched steed ,
now there 's a grave -- your foot is half upon it ,
ice - eyed and icy - faced .
no matter what she was ; living or dead ,
to compare the real history of charlemagne with the old
parson 's roguish daughter .
equipped with hoop of monstrous girth ,
but they are also valiant , and the fight
and wilderness is paradise enow .
and in each lone evening hour ,
" welcome ! " said he , " hiawatha ,
or shootin of a hare or moor - cock ,
have oft been stained with blots of care ;
have done it , not the foe ;
the reason of your folly :
its sweets are undecayed .
it sleeps upon the glittering thorn ,
and her hair , lying down her back ,
from pallid skies more death - like than the gloom .
he lives with a woman who sniffs when he 's smoking .
therefore understand the matter , and consider the vision .   daniel
a tale like this , of a day spent well !
redely and anone ;
and gazes in the air .
but the unthinking soul and body swoon
to roam through the brake ,
bristled with upright beams innumerable
the flesh may fail , the heart may faint ,
but on lonely nights we would hear them calling ,
or better than the rest ;
who would believe that in the quiet town
thronging the echo , dinned my ears , until
the name , dear traitor ! of some rival maid .
and the loud tick of the clock
i will geeve de ol' nag de sam ' jag on de deck ;
sits behind the fosse of death .   mine eyes saw not ,
and , in the sunshine streaming on quiet wood and lea ,
my fancies , fly before ye ;
strong and alone , my dove , with thee ;
thee , god , who mouldest men ;
for ofte time sche me bit
to hear thy warblers sing !
he ravish'd there the cloud - cloak from struggling albric 's hold ,
for the senator sometime may possibly be
near the cataract and whirlpool .
smitten unwares by that accursed shaft ,
then dido thus , with downcast look sedate ;
the dear wild rage of longing ecstasy :
i ance was abused in the kirk ,
in all the town , for death of this theban :
though sky and star may yet awhile divide
yet when all 's said , one thing i 'll swear ,
then kindly thus the punish'd youth bespake :
capt . g. wo n't it tire you ? ' better not , perhaps .
for the beast that was abroad--
merchant princes , and is hard up for a subject . the most approved
his ears were high and pricked :
fairest , believe !
taketh its form , and as upon the vent
rushes down the window - pane ;
lasts ever , past recall ;
and the farmyard was safe from robbers by night ,
to succour virtue , when our reason fails ;
arms for his chair , while all the rest of them
" and even there , amidst the barren steeps ,
" here money is not that way earn'd ,
- that rings of truth !   more do your people thrive ;
for ever with me must it dwell,--
the daughter of the aged ocean - god :
of the saviour served to still ;
to crack a bottle with a friend
emitted : magpies were they;--magpies nine :
in the new heavens,--because nor sin nor woe ,
meshes of thy music , my master !
deep in whose thoughtful breast thy godhead lies !
a - list for steps that were maybe mine -
down with blossoms pearly white .
and then the motion of the current ceased ,
snorts and scarcely seems to ruffle
and , did we judge of time aright ,
school :
a song fit for supper
that he mistake noght his gate ,
but were in texture like a bat , and these
why do i shudder as twilight spills
from the bleak pole no winds inclement blow ,
now i know not where to send him ,
some once familiar name , and he would raise
among the lights that gleam and pass ,
drew the venom'd fangs of death ,
th ' exceptions few ; some change since all began ;
the goodly sword of the unhappy count ,
vast was his wealth , and these the only heirs
bear to her this chain of gold ,
afford some screen to thee , and at any offense that may be done
with heart all thirsty for love and praise ,
he speeds , and through the vast ethereal skie
and unendurable shame ! that , loving thee ,
and every soul cried out , " well done ! "
authority on one or two occasions , in his remains of gentilism
of rare bushido , code of codes ,
i wish i could hop like you , "
lifted up her eyes on me
and talked to thousands of a woman 's worth .
" if thou wouldst call to mind how meleager
for where sad fear grew late , now boldness springs ,
now adorn the shelter'd vale .
still by the reckoning infants among men ,
and the snow - rush is delving
ruffles the warm afternoon ,
nor dreams that fear should hear and flee
love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth :
for the presidential office ;
changing its sweet to bitter , to despair
they watched the fair departing of the sun ;
twixt them that aske , and them that asked bee .
his echoed laugh replied ,
that 's to say , he turned protestant--_why _ , i can'tlarn ;
is bare to all your swords .
a flown bird , to a forsaken nest .
all up the street at a stately pace
stars of the morning sky ,
on being appointed to an excise division .
upon the desolate patagonian shore
still hems him round and round ,
and like a flower for humbleness of grace .
of mountains , and their unapproachable summits
and hailed the figure in his zeal
an ’ thee an ’ me amang ’em , jim ,
to give thy banner once more to the wind ?
when it is fully sung , its great complaint ,
ay , none shall nail so high his name
shame on the men who went away and of us wrote such
in the country , what bliss , when it rains in the fields ,
naimes , the duke , at his bridle rides .
nor trust in his kindred , though high their degree ;
and , as with elfin cables drawn
what did i give her when i had her on my knee ?
then lift , swelled with the blast .
fast withereth too .
then the magic metal - worker
that the mid - circle of supernal motion ,
his vegetables , and very soon after rusty came trotting into the
a loaf of bread , a lofty hill ;
philosophers will ponder
and can the beauty understand
decked in feathers iridescent ,
to get my little soul ?
pearled with fine spray , their bright hair floating ,
his seat at gods right hand , exalted high
evermore fierce , more fell , fell down at last
on the very branch 's end , so strangely
takes from himself it is not just he have .
a clamour of a thousand loves
i saw thee after in this crowd of life ,
breathed in a dismal whisper ' it is truth . '
they fear'd not for falling , they knew no appalling ,
when he , who ever watchful in advance
and decked her robe , and crowned her head
now shed aurora round her saffron ray ,
she questioned him about the war , the share
one of the pimps for albani with billets doux very impressive
fairest of the fairest , rival of the rose ,
a dozen little door steps
a charm from the sky seems to hallow us there ,
the phrygian rock , that braves the storm ,
with sion 's songs , to all true tastes excelling ,
and so i gathered heart , and cried again :
and bade me swift on him bestow
battle of stonington , iii . 338 ;
my idle fancy homeward :
a loud hosanna sent from all thy works ,
when twice she cried , she thought from out the darkness
a sweet suspension of delight .
remember where and what was proserpine , at the time when her
from lavender folds draped dreamily--
our playhouse is so near to fairyland
in the never - pleasant northland ,
nay nay except that man himselfe doo meeke
( ' orse gunners , listen to my song ! )
from steed to steed he vaults ; they rapid fly ;
abused too much by women . i came back ,
florence -- dante born 1265 ; his education ; his love for beatrice ;
now , when the striving is at end ,
can you love me so ,
my eyes , ears , nose , tongue , fingers , like five gardeners
but what distinctions by positions wrought !
songs of ancient wit and wisdom ,
moved to and fro , for his delight .
save the grass and leaves i devoured ;
smothered ' neath flowers of may .
if i could see it , or else mow the room ,
if all our finest deeds are done ,
all weapons in the battle field ?
and adiue for evermore .
hope might in my spirit start ,
lo , all the wistful air , and earth , and sky ,
thro ' the lawlands , o'er the border ,
and stop the fiery pest . four ships alone
the _ we _ was a masterpiece of loyalty , and french was suitably
_ truly , the light is sweet
wisdom and splendor in our brushes bold
when life looks lone and dreary ,
with massy strength the foe defy ,
as sounds that your chanter produces ;
a little swerving and the way is lost . ' "
the stain of manhood , of a coward mind :
we saw with our eyes the vermin sink ,
are flowers forgot , and faces that were fair .
ful mildeliche thereto thou bewe ,
go , go , go like a soldier ,
roof of the cloister , holding a veil before her face , and with a
still thou , o lord , thy word must keep ,
and i in quest of her would roam ,
lot captive away , and with him the goods of the people and gold
as i have , noo i 've wedded
utque suos arcus per nubila circinat iris ,
in the far , cold land of the killimacs .
which , like thee , to those in sorrow
the purpose of my task and why .
then spoke again the great recluse :
life 's great example weave .
so that thou speak no more as one who dreams .
repetito munere bacchi surrexere toris . ’ these words are thus
and with much dread some dire event forebode ,
through early youth , the brightening morn ,
but , while the danger of the deeps he tries
if it 's pleasant weather
for man in this hour must give all he holds dear ,
this little tear , oh lord , is all ! "
the hermit cross'd his brow--
and dullness o'er my brain is spread ,
where the cool grottos trench the hanging rock .
four roods of sheer ascent ) , sir walter found
to midnight banquets in the glimm'ring glades ;
and smote the mammoth of the southern plains ;
" heaven 's joy is deep and vast ;
you would nearly be smothered with latin and greek .
bold is the venture ,
but , whether waking or to sleep resigned ,
and , as we journey'd , on our shoulder smote
was she anything to you ?
took a taste of whisky , and you could n't get that
or , when one flame twin'd with another is ,
if ' twas a dream , why wake me , my worst foe ,
james rivington , printer , of late , to the king ,
where she dived beneath the waters ,
grasses run like a green sea
shall make thee shudder , wheresoever heard .
and the weird wild ways
manahem aside .
  _ mosques _ : the feature of an infidel city that first struck
the paeon archers from broad axius ' banks ;
a soul kept there so sweet : o no ,
said with voice that did not tremble ,
for let philosopher and doctor preach
into a sea of song - making
that instant ends their glorious horsmanship !
christ , dost thou live indeed ? or are thy bones
causidicos , vesana ! tuos tua fulmina terrent .
mine the sand - rimmed pickerel pond ,
went forth from his gloomy doorway ,
the doubts of strangers on the tale attend :
by pleasant high - built omaha
the flowers of the forest , that fought aye the foremost ,
but mally , thae knows very weel,--
hath language left thy lips , to place
and every cedar , with its weight of wet ,
' ave to tell .
thy year - worn cloak , thine iron stringencies
song is so old ,
gave with his hand my chaise a shove ,
qui t'a quittée ce matin
the page is stript , and beaten out of doors ;
shoot to the desert realms of their congenial night .
( _ variations on a theme by gilbert . _ )
" let others toil from year to year , i live from day to day . "
and though not of stone and lime , & c.
a pleasure - ground -- for whom ?
first rapture of our wild , estranging blood .
our hope in heaven , our dignity with man ?
" this shall be yours when you bring back
were firing this ' ell ' ole with bullet and shell .
may find the shining mistletoe that grows upon the tree ? "
if your keen royal wit pierce the gross web
and lasses lads too .
but from that hour a subtle change came o'er
hues of the rainbow , and sunset , and morning--
lemminkainen be exhausted . "
then clenched her teeth and read right on .
numbered i give you them and truly told ;
comply and meet both in their whole and parts ,
didst thou confine a christian 's sacred zeal ;
" and by my word ! the bonny bird
clear eye of heaven , immortal lamp
one moment cherished and the next forgot ,
for hungry church - yard worms to eat ,
tears fell , when thou wert dying ,
these things were all but known
eluded , cover'd whole by his round shield
the shining paths of paradise ;
dissolve the council , and their chief obey :
could she in all her births but coppie thee ,
you slipped her wicked chains ,
are the two words which bore one 's lips apart
she was the handmaid of our lord ,
that 's all the arsenal he 'll have to tote ;
and from a stalke into an eare forth - growes ,
maternal affection                     _ cinquefoil . _
and this one was ruggieri the archbishop ;
i guess i go to sleep , sometimes--
secure , and at the brightning orient beam
may climb pierian heights , and quit the lowly plain .
bring not to the workmen food to - morrow !
but yield , proud foe , thy fleet
visit'st my slumbers nightly , or when morn
the harpies shall no more revisit air .
to deem , as a most logical conclusion ,
when we were children , long ago ,
it is well - framed and prudent . now attend !
and each forbodes in tears , man is no longer mine !
but , my land !
so wistfully at the day .
no mortal ever saw before .
and many - wintered fleece of throat and chin .
tip - toe soft by the little red house ,
with sovereign daring and with sovereign might ,
found , heavy with wine , ill - starred deiphobus ,
she , whom tristram 's ship of yore
sated and laden with the goodly feast .
and , looking bashful in the flood ,
three kings , noble and puissant , did nurture her , gunther ( 4 ) and
and pinched my legs so lewdly ,
" doitet bodie ! auld or young ,
heaven robbed you of your reason . you would have me pay no heed
to whom the better elements
straightway to my brother 's cottage
i read thee rash and heedlesse of thy selfe ,
sharp rise the summits of the breathless trees .
of the wooers , and he held in his hand his wand that is
soaring in silvered steeps where cloud - surfs break ;
quae mare navigerum quae terras frugiferentis
to illumine other spirits on their pathway ;
she sings me a queer little sleepy song ,
or i shall quickly grow
an ' watch us till the bugles made " retire " ,
is ushered suddenly to his surprise
and future navies on thy shores appear .
i know that you are not the one that i
some flaming , fatal climax with their lives .
principally portraits of kings , not only of sweden , but of other
beset with stately figures everywhere
all they left me was the stalks--
shine on his soul , reflected from the days
among my shepherds , and , ( my rural works
the bronckhorst divorce - case
or in the dusk , when glow - worms light the moss ,
i read the promise and patiently wait .
to bite them and grind .
his herte berth , so as ye herde ,
divide and multiply and add ,
" my aunt must be a voluminous correspondent , sir , " i said .
or in conflagration pale ,
but if so dire a love your soul invades ,
that thoughe he be nought he thynketh al is well
fain will we seek his festal , which it were ill to miss ,
noo arthur 's seat{7 } sall be my bed ,
around us , all the gloom of grove ,
wept because a bitter sorrow
swelling pity smoor'd his wrath ;
the ivory shuttle through the shuttle - race ,
said within himself and pondered ,
ráma with lakshmaṇ thus conversed ,
but then , because of one by treason spent ,
i dare not ponder on humanity ;
walked by your side to prayer . these images
there be for the primordial elements
the king of the crocodiles he is good ,
far and wide ,
nix cum raus - that i had not come out .
the wise girl , such icarian fall
alas ! would weary you to hear ,
and bid their dancing leaflets trip and run
" and if a person looks at me ,
discern'd , when one its even tenour keeps ,
= fithel= , fiddle .
but madame bad luck soberly comes
for whom so many riuall kings to succour ,
" i do not think , at least until a late period in life , she
if yah contrary sentence drop ,
i had a shave before i kissed
to make thee , to make thee ,
" was never this thing to me , " he said ,
a hundred horsemen on the basalt floor
pytefull louynge and full of equyte
and flush'd and fretted as in pain .
too soon return'd to earth !
falls the sound of his feet mid lines
hereupon the feverish voice of the child reached their ears .
by a fair woman 's love art thou not blest ?
we wanted faces that we loved an ' knew ,
turns it o'er and o'er , and muses :
and by that falseness gender truth in you .
his regal seat , surrounded by his friends .
thoughts that have slumbered long awake and burn
and mean deeds creep to darkness from her gaze .
betwixt undoubted good and bad .
where the lake 's frore sahara of never - tracked white ,
of wrinkles and sublime in youth .
respite allow'd . dread through his bosom spread ;
that on high days was borne upon the head
far from longing and delight ,
are we then made free at last
but she , that evil , on the watch , noting the death anigh ,
he swore at that was startling to them both .
you must dwell beyond the foam ,
the lordes , whiche as wolden save
and traveler 's joy beguiles in autumn
to thee she bared her bosom and her brow ,
when thy sad eyes shall strain
her foot is lighter than the fawn 's ,
the wretch , who , sitting at his plenteous board ,
is needlesse to rehearse , all books do ring
their lips are ocean - mist .
i 've seen the new snob on his way ,
whom , i think , that realm never brought forth a more accomplished
acabaran mis llantos y querellas .
be followed by the smiling eye ,
no april robin ,
smoothing his voice , rough with accustom'd swell
" ye who from my childhood up have calm'd me ,
tears quickly dry , griefs will in time decay , ii . 115 .
i will roland in roncesvalles slay ,
skinks and owls whom no conscience storms
mischief is not life 's true aim ! "
and linèd coat of mails , girt with their swords
defects and vices in a shower of gold ;
then , with a cry , i suddenly expose my face to view ,
o , if he knew i dwelt in hell ,
as he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at hector , for he was
are orphans of the earthly love and heavenly .
and that , when tasted , do not cloy .
at this a butcher of the town
and i will sing him , as he lies ,
come , my lesbia , no repining ;
wisdom , and virtue , and his land shall be
shadows like some airy lawn
thou’rt said to kisse , and lick the dust of ’s shooe ,
criticized by all . "   mariana , history of spain , b. xiii .   c. 9 .
without word of salutation ,
of green slime along stonework of docks
these were the rough ways of the world till now .
then , some morning , in the lurch
thou walkest with me as the spirit - light
one moment , had not lived to fly .
sorrow shall sit where i have dwelt,--and be
that my hopes , and my fears , put me all in a tremble .
wealth 's wasteful tricks i will not learn ,
beyond a single gentleman 's belief .
about ! o , that i well divine--
let storm and darkness do their worst ;
dinna , do not .
doc argies ' at " the red - eyed law , "
the violet , the pink , and jessamine ,
when his wonder - tales had ended :
it is an hundred years at least ,
and soothed each wound which pride inflamed:--
will fall on them with ours .
an english village , a summer scene ,
by old cephisus deep ,
hangs quivering out between his dust - smear'd jaws ,
when his small treble mixed with ocean 's roar !
some nimbler juice would make him foam and rave ,
thy violet eyes to me
thou animatest ancient tales ,
yet thus it is ; nor otherwise can be ;
unconquering but unconquered still !
the mind , that ocean where each kind
his chosen comrade passed from human sight ,
of green or silvery bower doth enshrine
his cosmic code of law last night .
the 15th stanza reads thus :
here , bleating lambs crowd to the evening fold
already this is willed , and this is sought for ;
when gayly prancing to the clash
and life was all unknown ;
i 'll aulder be gin simmer , sir .
to buy you , and that you may so
" speak to me , kama ! why so silent ? give
turn them either way you please--
went forth to sport and playe ,
and her love ,
such as where solitude and pleasure meet ,
swells with unprescient bark the tuneful roar .
caȝte of her corou{n } of grete tresore ,
yet you may clasp its feet in fond embrace ,
then watched their coach roll grandly
would have us deem , before its growing mass ,
strangers now trample unawed o'er they race ;
scarce for an instant staying till we reached
at seeing us descend they each one stood ;
what was the matter with the evening now
preserved until their last necessity ;
the spring is come on ,
that beastly north - easter still blows ,
the smugglers whiles cam wi ' their pocks ,
when he called the flowers , so blue and golden ,
between us and the sea .
but not forgetful -- no !
i someway felt it was n't right ,
aye , aye , and let it welk , say i !
the night was thick and hazy
i crush the poppies where i tread ,
i have marched with life in its best parade
my immortality is there .
but rather with the saints i doe rejoyce ,
their lot forbade : nor circumscribed alone
from caviare to pork ;
dash away ! plash away !
_ belov’d of my heart _ , _ wherefore sorrowest thou so _ ?
the beamy lances , rested by the two ,
two boys ever saw , in all their lives !
thus urged the chief : a generous troop appears ,
i cut and slip
devolv'd ; though should i hold my peace , yet thou
love not me for comely grace
yet some of 'em buzzed onhealthily near ,
stand forth the grecian who desires to win
" little bee , my honey - birdling ,
rhyme 's poor and broken - hearted !
is slaughter'd at his crib , he slaughter'd _ me _ .
i saw the flags of havoc fly ,
as outlaws wo nt to do .
penciled fine ,
will they know what we hardly know ?
forgot her song to sing .
thus by the deeds that he has done
and golden - hilted swords so keen ,
that in their welcome to him / they did such courtesy bestow .
athwart an evening grey .
if ' tis done for hire ,
some on arch of air were seated ,
( our nature meant to humanize )
" i am sent to thee      by seamen bold ;
over the innocence of that sweet child ,
its secret sins,--black deeds of soul--
requires attention , and our skill in turn .
to dazzle when the sun is down ,
with dust from the pit of its overthrow .
and the mix'd clamour thunders in the skies .
in vain she tries her paste and creams ,
my verse your virtues rare shall eternize ,
on his arms and his head
blew off selina 's hat !
that they , themselves , in each and every case ,
they cut through every turn and wind ,
had told with shrill cry ,
" take the fleetest of my coursers ,
the skies seemed true above thee ,
his presence to these narrow bounds confin'd
sleek as a banker , and almost as fat ;
be the sunlight of my people ! "
and , every straining nerve on wing ,
clouding the plains in worse than stygian shade ;
received the poem ’s pregnant seed ,
aloft above their bucklers , / from hand of good knight sent !
for the heavens must have the place
it eats the flesh and bone by turns ,
there craws an ' whistles sike(1 ) a pair ;
another child , far , far away ,
" ' tis some visitor , " i muttered , " tapping at my chamber door,--
and girding them on every side , the rout
how broad the shadows of the oak ,
now thou art gone , and never must return !
then join’d the chiefs , and follow’d through the field .
thus spake the dame to sítá : she
to catch one glimpse of heaven 's blue
without , within , are troops disposed .
comfort came down the trembling wretch to raise ,
and , patient bearing quite exhausted ,
with life and only vanish away
where our holiest longings are ,
or it might be my veins ran cold,--
with childe and made hem bothe grete ,
in spite of furs and wadded garments blent .
but they said , " do n't you see ,
of toiling hinds with brown arms bare ,
as of one that wakes in paradise ,
of silver and of copper ,
glimmers between the two poles of the world
and from his rugged face the tempests bound .
from two , twixt whom , there lyueth but one hart .
then unto the eternal light they turned ,
some laid her forth , while others wept ,
and johnny shall go to the fair ,
which round about in sport he hurled ;
to uttermost decimal worth ,
beneath their feet .
the grave 's dark womb his awful voice obey'd ,
along the unseen path on festal days ,
tendió la mano y no pudiendo asillo
yet one chance is allowed — your sure repentance ,
the hapless lady lay distraught
and chafing it , saw ... not her i loved !
all suddenly both meek and mild she was ,
old rhodes suspected me of stealing
in our outer hides and skins
he marked a chance - met boulder on the ground ,
the heed , wherewith i do prepare myself
the moon looks just as far away . "
by prayer to pardon and advise , what end
the mosquito , sang his war - song ,
in every stone a glittering gem ,
oh ! where can my lady be ? etc .
from the wheat - malt honey - seasoned ,
work of an idle time , the summer of life 's long year ;
of argus , and more wakeful then to drouze ,
chariot of bacchus .
which seem so light before the wind . "   he thus :
being good at shouts , especially the boys !
' tis heaven hath led you . lady , look on me--
deep eyes that smile in silence ,
one of you hold my head up from the pillow . "
have ne'er beheld , nor yet smooth - shaven oar ,
and springing forward , with his pointed spear
kat'e - ja'tar ( kataya'tar ) .    the daughter of the pine - tree .
the stars drew back in fright or dazzlement ,
one eve the summons came for him
a merry christmas glee ,
whatever you may do or dream ,
loiter'd around us ; then of honey cells ,
its lofty spirit when my brow was bent towards
thy beauty , is thy pure heart 's holiness ;
' twere better they were dead .
he goth ayein , til he were oute .
star - scattered scope on scope .
so eerily , so eerily ,
he is now careering o'er ?
what wealth historic might your words impart !
lorde grettest of grece in londes and cytees
she waned with grief as a fading star ,
whan time was , that i my bede
role to play without study ; she missed in her cue
when our earth we have seen , and have linked
a long , sharp sword for show or quarrel,--
the artist 's teeth gleam from his bearded lip .
  sestos was a city of thrace , on the dardanelles , opposite
" now when ' tis not your aim to oppose , "
till their proud standards , rear'd in other skies ,
long in their homes they brooded over this ,
that world whose grief for the absent one
unskilful he to note the card
i were tranced -- but in her dream ,
among this band of traitors how sore beset am i !
to them could be denied .
like the silver rays of the big cold hunting moon .
who lops the vines . when he the ladder lifts ,
that dwelt in wainscots and loved not the sun .
whole squadrons fell , or to the center shook ,
and destructive hail pass over .
de scintillations sitôt le septuor .
and many an omen seen to - day
our _ prussia 's _ great _ frederick _ is that _ blazing star _ !
the pictures come , are seen , and go :
and the recognition of merit
had tost his ball and flown his kite , and roll'd
till near that city of the dead ,
have , as i could , my people kept .
from off his head the glitt'ring helmet tore ;
is also wo nt to paint her cheeks at night ,
may blaze the virtue of their sires . "
caressed by the sunlight and bathed by the showers ,
have i not paid , have i not paid the price ?
as to outstrip feet younger than thine own ,
are like thee , young desire .
on the shore of sound of sima .
and famine itself is genteel ,
chained by stern duty to the rock of state ,
what became i , who by my nature am
i dreamt of love in the golden glory
whither is thy vessel sailing ? "
" i may be call'd vain , silly fool ,
an ' go in where ma 's at , an ' say :
scylla was carrying them off , and i heard them call out my name
i know not in whose hands are laid ,
by love ’s absorbing might possessed .
when that hold breaks is dead for ever .
upon this plan my soul is bent ,
so high above me placed thou seem'st to stand ;
the little fate allows , they share as soon ,
her fair and featurous face
thence , through the fields , fast hurrying from that dome ,
thad hideth god , when veiling death with terror .
that borough fire and ruin may expect .
and those wild whirling figures born
we must retreat to rearward , for that way
upward to her skirts that rustled .
the ten - necked tyrant ’s mother bore , —
never gives his strength to others .
the fairy of the fountain rose :
and said , oh ! trust with his preserver him
to maintaine you three , in this realme to be
that it owes its popularity .
speak no more of his renown ,
so thenk i nam but deed , with - oute more .
" what ! the duke , then , the night in that lone inn had pass'd ?
amid the spears , the battle - wood that latins forth have sent .
or , sometimes wavering , throw back the sun ,
of poyntes of armys he schewyd hur hys fylle ,
all my life 's bliss from thy dear life was given ,
persistent and perfecting in endeavour ,
how she fought to be put down to pick them .
gae make out the lease , do not linger ,
spake the minstrel , wainamoinen :
come under my plaidie ,
with willows crowned .
digun , dijon , city of france . 144 .
and list to the long - accustomed flow
much reason , and in thir actions oft appeers .
and swinging from the mountain - side
turn to your sleeping ,
pes and acord awey schol wende
with our harvestings precarious,--
wid his feet .
whipping aside to let me pass .
then outspake jurfalez , marsil 's son :
’ tis of a wild colonial boy , jack doolan was his name ,
a torrent dried by summer ’s heat . ”
whose day begins when day is done .
sugríva ’s uncle lofty - souled .
by grappling guns . love drove me to rebel .
and said : " what is that queer - shaped thing ?
but just at this period they wanted to send
where lie the unhappy and unfortunate .
year 1679 , lasalle set sail
the madd'ning rage of florence , in that day
were playing at the ba ,
wide to the foe she 'd ope : what could she not ?
o house not of gold but of gain ,
when i a ship see on the seas ,
god 's everlasting praise ,
the bird flew to his grave and died amid a thousand
wantoning , singing sweet :
thy nest which thou canst drop into at will ,
when suddenly stood at my head a dream ,
moon of the night that is my soul ,
the glory of our tongue , and he perchance
ridiculous habit ; most children -- little boys , that was -- held onto
to see all the lions which are to be seen
an ' this is how he left the sea
turn wheresoe'er i may ,
deeper than any foes or friends have known ;
on the rue de la paix she was wo nt to shine ;
it was a sight one should behold
which vex'd the queen full sore ;
so will'd some demon , minister of woes !
" ' what 's in copper - plate capitals ? ' inquired time .
on earth lies aldigier , and there must rest .
when earth can yield no more
but be a loving father to thee ,
worth being poor to hold in fee .
by his misfortune trust to win .
gleam the white locks , and then are seen no more .
same as him they crucified ,
without wild desires ;
till their wet haunches smoked .
i have often feared lest god the all - just ,
sit , vario motu quae candida sidera verset .
rose - petals . . . the gray dove . . .
my storms of wrath amused him very much :
faire drop , why quak'st thou so ?
whereon to gaze the eye with joyaunce fills ,
" both these are happier , more approved
by going , to - night , to hear the actors play !
my dear lord 's vitall death .
and if i stoop to combat men ,
at that fierce volley from thy foemen near ,
" ' tis well that such seditious words are sung
and wae betide the bush of brier !
for another idle hour i sit ,
if yet a greek the sight of hector dread ,
removing from the wall
than ever forced unpitied hearts to bleed . "
shall gar me withdraw the plighted hand ,
oh come ! we 'll charter such a pair of nags !
the murmur of the mountain rill ,
and the rolling drums are beaten ,
when they had hastily haled it out ,
the town - destroyer , thousand - eyed ,
judge then what bulk the whole of him must show ,
for instance , while others discuss and debate ,
of all achaia , thou produce the gifts
of birds and blossoms soon .
from petrarch or camoens drew
he loves their opposite : and there is he ,
and ever o'er the trade he bent ,
whose may be this handsome vessel ,
with deep affection
there helped him well grim hagen , / and gernot in the fray ,
i 'll coax the light to your eyes , and the rose to your face ,
upon her crest she wore a wannish fire
the eager children cry--
he dropt a tear on susan 's bier ,
come thou leading master , mind !
to the great father 's house ? how have i called
offers to thee her fruitful water ,
the billows on my moorings press't ,
  roger bacon , the father of experimental philosophy . he
proudly emulous of honour , steadfastly on wisdom set ;
whose smile an angel seem'd to be--
no man 's praise upon earth ;
whence he came riding down ;
she with those other spirits gently smil'd ,
monimia 's constancy we all must feel ,
were scattered from that hall the shades of night ,
ere speech from speech was sundered ,
little i whilom deem'd my artless zeal
sepelit recipitque in sese omnia , omniumque idem est pater ,
when she came in at the chamber door ,
thither oft , his glory greeting ,
upon the hour when i was born ,
whip and follow after ! _
upon your knees , your breasts rising and falling
shall i his forgotten hour
tune--"_here 's a health to them that 's awa . _ "
the sun in mid - day glory smiled ,
so radiant then , as summers pass
around and near him maia and dione .
who serve me in the usual way ,
and the world was red with his wrecks ; but grayer
and time should gurgle on ,
but cease from defamation ;
dead , with the dew on your brow ,
the corsairs for their slaves .   o avarice !
they wend their way , elate to be alive .
the lion 's mane 's on end : the bear how fierce !
not all parts like , but all alike informd
sir - loin he hacked sma ' , man .
verse many words beginning with the same letter .   but this knack ,
spicy forests , ever gray ,
that sits upon the pillow - hill ,
the tall arch - captain of the embattled line ,
whom you forsook -- unable to defend ;
" long sought , and lately won , "
be just -- and take a twofold sacrifice ! "
then throws them lightly by and laughs ,
the iron - hearted governor of salza
a rabbit old and lame limped down the path ;
joined hands and descended a maze
erect drew his in toward the temples , and , from the excess of
earth with her onward chime , with winter spring .
that were as queenly night
so it is his -- allotted his of fate
those were ferns , of course , but some
to fan the stars with flaming wings !
she 's jes ' dat gal what stole my heart ,
his men . abating not his mighty blows ,
a shatter'd roof o'er every hut appears ,
beholds them rolling on to meet his light
i never can be at my ease at all .
desyst your folysshe pleasour of trauayle
with every gift and grace to clothe
in a proven suit of mail ?
but the longer he lives with her eyes to see ,
larger than those of earth ; and i might see
along the shore they , prowling , went ,
with memories of " forty - five . "
yea , sir , she said , that shall i certainly .
on reading in the publick papers , etc . , 18 , = 112=
altho ' thro ' foreign climes i range ,
ajar , secure , inviting ;
passages , but from that which joins four circles with three
how gaily we live , living honest and poor ,
by sir egerton brydges to his edition of hammond 's poems , 1816 ,
upon the rhythmic zephyrs of thy song .
from them the desire of meat and drink , then did telemachus
must i lose you ?
“ a faithful brother i will be ,
i trust you have no worldly taint
i cry , " appear no more ! "
as he drew the cruel bow - string .
shining bright with oil , and plaited ,
no more do i hear in the city ’s din ,
began the holy millstone to revolve ,
and annihilation , wilt thou be the prey of sorrow ? this
and the ghost of amphimedon answered , " agamemnon , son of atreus ,
of incantation , demons rule these waves ;
ah ! now , my brother , hide thyself no more ,
and blended form , with artful strife ,
but , o love , i love but _ thee _ ! '
he has outsoared the envy of gods and men ,
bearing within its hearts as brave ,
" if you see the great bear clearly ,
just a round dozen : ferguson and binner
  " lord , open thou my lips . " -- psalm li . 15 .
to him who gives and him who takes away .
all are not good , be slow to pray for one
thyself thou threwest down , o happy man ,
aquello , porque no humilles
and half a hundred bridges .
canto xlvi . the guest .
i think on my bonnie lad
reached his beak beyond the cloudlets ,
a pure gem is worth the lifting though it lie amongst the clay .
shepherd , unto the young lamb 's throat ;
pardon , lacon , if i weep ;
scarce is kauśalyá left alive ;
dost in these lines their artless tale relate ,
humility in subsequent obedience , as disobeying he intended to
no matter who or what you are , or where you are , the how
|        ( in preparation )        |
and this perceiving , to appease
there , under ebon shades and low - browed rocks
who raised it up . it has no terrors , dear .
evermore gaining on the larboard side .
so shall our voice
" brave companions , " said he , " shall _ we _ noble beasts
in the death hues of agony
as they of rum - ti - foo .
these are exquisite lines , and have given delight to innumerable
tempteth my better angel from my side ,
to bear with me this burthen
in line 3 we read
to keep the king from every ill .
and fills us with fears , we triumph by faith ;
plain , on which it spreads , and makes a marsh , and is wo nt in
and ruthless caesar 's standards , and the fleet
he feigned with rattling copper things and beat of horny hoof .
my soul is helpless , wan ,
the drums , the drums approach and pound ,
moral attached to each.--_boston herald . _
to impress one point from which i ne'er should go :
significance .
make me mazed , iss , me deear , a whisht an ' crazed ; jenny ,
they landed -- and the boat again
and many a mast to maim ,
how -- when once fix'd -- with busy wheels dost thou
how ? where ? the treasure hath he buried , pray ?
sing , dorothy , sing ,
is the burden past your bearing ?
with sudden mists , as lingerers stay ,
velvet apartment , turned suddenly and confronted his pursuer .
they will find us dead to - morrow
o'er thy cheek , and o'er thy breast
of which the holy hermit told ,
let the alders guard the cattle ,
and with unheard of hate and wrong , her foe
stern " cautions " they espy ;
a dream was dreamt by kriemhild the virtuous and the gay ,
the manis saule to the lady ,
pass'd on in silence , hasting to pursue
invisible , its appearance has afforded us great amusement . one
with such and so unmoved a majesty
before , ' twas never half so fair !
or ever yet aeneas named it so ,
but the sounds came to me only as the murmur of a stream
as a fond father gives his son .
o niobe ! with what afflicted eyes
tower aloft into the air of amber .
was aware till when they cried out , " who are ye ? " whereon our
and while the world endures , thy verse will cheer
glorious the doom , and beautiful the lot ;
and shut eyes underneath the rusty mane ;
refers to the penates which æneas brought into latium . dionysius
while children come , with cries of glee ,
in all unlikely sounds .
mid haunts dim - shadow'd in the realms of mind ,
through which thy slave - cursed texas entered in ,
( reverently sung , no instruments )
on mountains and rivers and lakes ;
now when rahéro was forth , he paused and hearkened , and heard
this morning in my attic high
and all her song was but of lady 's bowers
and the lion in his whelps , his whelps that none shall brave ,
nevermore to show my visage
to ground he bore that champion with his hand .
followed the piper for their lives .
she with the bait of her comely looks ,
her hands it was whose patient skill could trace
then rise , o fleecy fog , and raise
however little -- less were fit -
won ' buy soon a hat lak dis ,
then goes in sad surprise .
still beats , but can not find the way to wound .
with me , at the time that my mother hath gone to her upper
an ardent judge , who , zealous in his trust ,
he 'd a loyal congregation and his views were orthodox
the cup and the wine , and , if you would find me again
_ and the copse where you once tied my shoe - knot _
and certainly thy lover hast thou won ;
that whispered and forbade me to repine .
strangers took no part .
weep , weep for her ; but weep no more for him .
duramque callet pauperiem pati
subtlest of women that the world has ever seen ,
and stars in music of delight
and nidhug gnawed upon its root ; then were loosed
never afeard are we ! "
and brave alonzo 's spirit sought the skies ,
in several oaths -- armenian , turk , and greek--
" you are doubtless very big ;
and eyes that were dim
" but save a little room -- a bag
could better wake or still ?
that sung full sweetly of a tree
and would have killed fair ino , but that she fled
the prudent general turned it to a jest ,
have no pleasure in the future ,
not to mention ariosto , whose descriptions will often admit of no
the morning came , but not the holy friar .
to hector and his host their bands prepared ,
and hied away to the hurrum hills above the afghan border ,
caze i'se gwineter dance wid liddle mollie lou .
and bears him , cleansed from blood , triumphant to his friends .
heat , i made this verse:--
laughed the brook for my delight ,
so they among themselves in pleasant veine
' mid the silvery saltbush well content ;
is tiring itself out , and dying ,
they fled to ráma , sure defence
may he be dad , and meg the mither ,
and remember in your playing , as the sea - fog rolls to you ,
the minutes stay ;
accursed art thou ! thou are condemned
as the radiance in our eyes
you 've grown enough , but not grown up .
his well - beloved consort ’s fate ,
whose lingering light is yet unspent,--
thro ' spirit lands and empyrean heights ,
frae less to mair it gaed to sticks ;
an army when its king has fled :
yee sisters ! i , ’ tis i , that humbly pray !
to his own native shore .
down through the far - off days !
roses red and roses white ;
senses , that the fruits of intuition itself are instinctively
durus es , ah , quisquis tam dulcia vincula solvis ;
ours have arrived , and he who led their bravery is there .
new and green , and decked with flowers .
willingly i myself place at my well - beloved neighbor 's disposal ,
i 've known a perjur'd witness brought to swear ,
ye can howk i ' the kebbuck an ' howk again
and drake was home again , but not to rest ;
i see the stars above me , world on world :
from him diverted , on each other turns .
thick thundering o'er the plain are driven ;
oh , but to float away upon the night ,
sad when he sits shuts up her yellow leaves ,
he wint to the fair , and kicked up a dust there ,
nor sauce , nor state , that i could see ,
till to his orifice he brought , whose limb
" love who will , for i 'll
which monster made it first and next a prey .
sweet thoughts , in their essence diviner
the roof becomes a purple mist
the owl and the eel and the warming - pan ,
the star - fays bring their caravans
with all the old intensity of feeling .
the world is so full of a number of things ,
from the rivage of genoa , and st . pietro dell ' arena ; the
then she said , " o pau - puk - keewis ,
this was the lesson a life of trial and sorrow had taught her .
those folys a place may chalenge in my shyp
like great alcides , his all - conquering son ?
her fingers roved thro ' that bright hair ,
that you see will disappear under the earth ; drink ,
i think that they are glad inside !
his shield cast down , he took his helpless blade
i enter indelicately into all their souls .
it lay beside the atlantic wave ,
of sun - born strangers and of earth - born men .
" it chances , that among us any makes
and twofold love unites the double sex .
who 've shown , by stopping the church 's food ,
i tell you sir,--_you shall be paid _ . "
strayed here a mile and there a mile
for as a man that late hath lost his wits ,
or over our meads of the vale ,
come ! " i said , and we rose through the surf in the bay .
wherewith he wo nt at heaven 's high council - table
brother - mortals should disturb the selfish apathy of our souls !
didst serve him with armor and whet his sword
yet never one told all you are--
his eyes , then fixed them on the ground ,
is it saint joseph would say to us all ,
it was many and many a year ago ,
hark , the ringing word _ charge!_--now the tussle and the furious
if checkt in soaring from the plain
barn .
_ i should love to find my soul there _
maria ( perceiving ribera ) .
with an earthquake 's speed ,
v. 47 .   as from the first a second beam . ]   " like a reflected
or early harmony the woodlands cheer'd !
meadow , so mightily roared the fair doors smitten by the
and silence , and the warm strange smell of clover ;
down sank our threescore spears together ,
i lo'e her best of ony .
which could not be believed , when all men knew what liberty mr .
though bacon went not quite so freely to nature as our latest
" two lines in poe--
look , when the rose to deep vermilion hue
they left him , like dogs slinking from a lion in his pain .
here by the window with your hand in mine
breathing balm , and the lawn
perfect , and all must be at length restored .
the kyng at the yate stode
and failing in thy power to bless
well pleas'd him their fair vesture , and well their armor sheen ,
that is grown savage and unmanageable ,
on her mouth museful sweet--
lxxviii . " lo , there his honour and the faith he swore ,
this morning i rode hence .
limned in white alabaster , glistening , grand ,
thro ' a sun - swept smother of sweat and smoke
through the air .
that jesus knows them all .
show me thy feet ; show me thy legs , thy thighs ;
upon the shore the waves crept to and fro ,
thou see'st the foe secure ; how faintly shine
betre is to wayte upon the tyde
by oath to back the same ,
youkahainen thus made answer :
moving with hurried syllables
would zealously seek him again on the ship over the wide
for the fierce english vowe the towne to take ,
the dog which we met with soon after our starting belonged to mr .
yet he was kind , or laboured to be kind ,
let us give him a bed ,
the priest on skins of off'rings takes his ease ,
if we 've calculated clearly ,
the voice of godhead , sang . oh , ecstasy ,
in fortune .
to whom the friar : at bologna erst
no :   it 's not from the stranger you met once .   ah ,
strike these last clocks , that knell th ' expiring year !
the two hosts heard that cry , and quaked for fear ,
for votive offering brought ,
send these , the homeless , tempest - tost to me ,
take a young shoot from the thicket ,
where , with her best nurse , contemplation ,
mount and make you ready ;
( after listening to the story of the buggy ride ,
where the " boundary " should be ;
cry the children , " hear the hens ! why , what can be the matter ? "
to take just vengeance under his own roof ,
swept away before the blast !
from britain 's bold besieging bands ,
quaint little folding cases fastened with tiny hook ,
ye rose , a monument of deity ,
but through the midst of them his lions trod
hush , the poor dark mortals come !
and rarely smote an edge on plate and chain .
and seldom it is that one sound comes alone ,
in crime , the counsels of our virtue,--share
they lift against the far profound :
if thine own hearing hath attentive been ,
you often in pride on me frowned ;
" thou shalt seek another country , a joyless dwelling-
thus hee in scorn . the warlike angel mov'd ,
one passion of expectation -- as if that song
thy vaunting threats are idle now .
whenever their dwelling you chance to approach ,
alder - wood , the window - casings ,
for joy through a wide - open portal it guides ,
and flash and vanish , file on file , the bands
more than our rapt agreement and delight
and asks a bark : the chief a bark supplies .
more are there to love well , and more they love there ,
with flashes of barbaric hues
where were your dinner orators
in distribution , my peculiar meed .
sing at their feast with comfortable breasts .
to ply the hook among amid the yellow corn ,
it made me lonely and it made me sad
the hindermost it stretched upon his thighs ,
oh ! dinna cross the burn , willie ,
praise her virtues to thy mother ,
and those untruly errant called i trow ,
they bound her fast against the stake
a deathless name .
pleasant , but what is most befitting in each case . man is dearer
is the rich , " sweltered venom " got
yet , with a brass that nothing stops ,
oi know as much about thim both as my profissor knows :
the hollow hive of heav'n wane in her light .
for he is bound to disallow
was found , well - suited to the plan
on greenland 's barren strand .
venture their lives for their dear countries good ,
to act as brave a part .
immovably suspended , like to those ,
moaning , three of us , head by head ,
aught that is gone ;
and that 's to keep thy lent .
brother dear , i obey .
be lessons right severe ,
but tho ' my back be at the wa ' ,
at quando lotum gangis aut indi fretis
at length the man perceives it die away ,
and dirged by tennyson 's sweet sad rhyme .
where every lovely blue flower 's e'e
the house where i dwell alone !
is copied from the life . you might pat him and feel his brazen
the rose ablossom at the rainbow 's base
not old laertes , broken with despair :
so you never shall startle frankie more ,
whom time in his fleetings
a sound of gibbering gnomes , of elfish song--
are all my fading vision sees ;
quo desiderio veteres renovamus amores
spoil all things in a trice !
and thogh men wolde make a myn ,
and light to dark unceasingly ,
the seashore strewn with seaweed far away ,
their dainty courtships on the dipping sprays ,
and with these earthly eyes i gaze no more
back to thy parents ' ashes i repay .
by all on high adoring mortals know !
tell me -- and be assured , that since you stain
that in earth ’s core their dwelling make .
creative passed ; and christ was born .
love winged my hopes and taught me how to fly ( jones )
but come with old khayyam , and leave the lot
but it 's not worth while to forage ,
through the flames the wife is able
euiscerati corpus laceratum patris !
with silent grief , but loudly blam'd the state ,
and let grey fools be indolently good ,
them figures in red in the corner ,
' ungracious ! ' answered florian ; ' have you learnt
asking for the news ;
for the former seeth no man , and the latter no man sees .
how can ye chant , ye little birds ,
none had seen so many wonders ,
even where the low hic jacet answers him ;
when death is come , shall naught remain .
close - grappled by the collar , hair , or arm :
and lap you close with loving leaves .
no peace , sweet land , to bid my heart rejoice
the sea encircles it around , and groans on every side :
but bid the man sit down , and tell him what was taught
but the reading that runs all around them , you know,--just the
an absent hero 's nuptial joys profane
of the wealth thy storehouse reckons ,
in centuries dead and damned that reek below
but waste the town he shall not , nor attempt
and a gentle consort made he ,
but i must tarry with the winter hard ,
red small leaves of the maple
fawn - eyed and a leopard - yellow ,
and scatters all its bloom away .
he put a bullet through his brain .
nor has she e'er yet understood
leave thou , too , my spleen uninjured ,
but ne'er a knight more fully / had gracious lady 's favor won .
ye curlews calling thro ' a clud ;
scant closed were the doors , when having broke
or brought my trees and houses out ,
i 'll see the beatific sight ,
the smallest unit is a pair ;
some were made from skin of marten ;
upon the mead , and , gazing upward , sighs .
" so help me on my journey / to the land of burgundy ,
vere pleacemen do resort .
" in moussa 's frame,--and thence descending flowed
but mournfully serene and clear;--
" in thy boat , o wind , convey him ,
stain with dust each tender flower ,
call'd him soft names in many a mused rhyme ,
and saftly , yestreen , as i milked my cow ,
in winter trenches , cowed and glum
mark thou my words , and in thy inmost breast
' if you could just contrive , ' he said , ' to stint
from mighty jove , his temples through the land ,
summer winds , that split the husk
and by eternal word writ and confirm'd ,
angel wings , and smoke of battles ,
upon the apple - tree .
“ love feeds on still . from thee all hope is borne .
ship on to the sands and got out of her on to the shore , where
most tender , prompt at duty ’s call ,
as empty as a desert on the moon .
have latterly gone hence
he says " the time is almost here
he who gave the ring must have the maiden . "
creator am i , too , with all my heart and mind ;
let thy black laborers from their toil desist :
and from a puppy grow a hound . "
to keep them all from harm .
ramis , et obliquo laborat
in fact she will smile and think it better
a kiss then i gave her,--and ere i did leave her ,
with folded wings , go , silently !
through pine , and oak , and laurel ,
to him in torment where the tempest screamed ,
attention , and is not pleased with any long interruption to her
i see no farther now than i saw then ,
and all is dark again ; till suddenly falls
of honour , such as men , ' tis true ,
god be with you .
{ 8 } first weary at his plough the labouring hind
heart , take courage , ' tis not worthy , vol . vi . , 9 .
i drain the dregs , and they are now alloy .
for the count and the caesar were one .
or the hulk of the scampering beast that fears
where clinking sheepbells make a broken chime
of his childe , he onely is culpable
came , on a sabbath noon , my sweet ,
ye wood , be witness of my dark designs ,
in a sort of runic rhyme ,
but myths and fables of eld , asia 's , africa 's fables ,
my wealth , my city , and myself are yours .
like mungo 's tormentor , both " preachee and floggee . "
a two - edged sword
like little lacquered boots on the rough stone .
she never found fault with you , never implied
to offer me large store of his great wealth ;
producing all the varieties of contingent things .
for as when _ orpheus _ plaid , so do they wait .
an earthquake blast that would have tossed
quae tamen etsi uno non est contenta catullo
perchance , while pit and gallery cry " hats off ! "
with blossoms , and birds , and wild - bees ' hum ;
" what though he 's now gane far awa ' ,
nash ceased . and , far away down friday street ,
how they scoffed at and answered my grief
close to thy breast , and feels its sighs !
no more the unknown god , but evermore
sumitrá ’s son , bound by a vow , —
that is my home of love : if i have rang'd ,
for you , will i be earlier than the sun
“ with equal ardor both their minds inflam'd ,
whose letters are flaming gold .
for who that hye clymmeth his fall can nat be soft
autolycus ; whom , when i sought the shores
she had no armlets and no head - tires then ,
then eastward , like lightning ,
poet sent this poem to edmund _
your poem must eternal be ,
such a solemn story
will be our knowledge from the moment when
your day is such a little one ,
from its fountains
which marched in the advance had wholly passed us
this jupiter him dede exile ,
how that mother 's hand they miss !
and put an end unto your joyous life ,
through all the wide border his steed was the best ;
to - who!--a merry note ,
and wondrous art was built out of the clay ,
with buxom meat and cap'ring wine ,
deliciis veneris diues natura laborat .
whose coward souls your manly form disgrace ,
he every afternoon at two
and to your heart you whisper , " he has spoken . "
close following pace for pace , not mounted yet
floods .   depart now with thy household and thy host of guests ,
vague , elusive as delight is .
in the daytime on the pastures ,
bring back the tender thoughts of life ,
on its roof did float and flow ,
and from his palsied grasp the reins had fallen .
a hundred times before . '
the willowy hills and fields among ,
one , two , three ,
i see where the live - oak is growing , i see where the yellow - pine ,
i know the sage ; the wisest of the wise .
these instant shall be his ; and if the powers
the day of reckoning is near at hand ,
his barns were fired , his goods consumed ,
the tree of my song is bare
voice which is not a whit better than the cry of a cock .... the
over the threshold of the gate :
that al the lust of wommanhiede ,
while from neck , arm , and foot was sent
" but no mistakes in this , "
you have studied all this .   then , the universe , too ,
and i saw that she had grown aware ,
for those unhappy chaps
winter 's the lazy time for husbandmen .
and patriot sage ,
he bore no gifts save the myrrh in his hand ,
tor , law professor at the u
now , as i 've heard , this little trout
you may take it , i 'm willing , corinne ! "
left us cause to mourn lord edward that is gone , boys , gone :
in the spirit land she wanders
anon , no beacons burning ,
man lived what 's termed the ' simple life '
whose numbers , stealing through thy darkening vale ,
life 's inward approval !
they 've gone to the war
two little maids
they sip the scandal potion pretty ;
the text of the psalm in the psalter
and with a curious eye
the very darkness that time knew not of ,
if thou hadst lived , and lived to love me !
they ate and drank and danced all night ,
ere yet was lost the art divine ;
on ! on ! to the cannon 's mouth they stride ,
stand up unconscious and refute the charge .
blown by the june 's mild , musky lips ;
that seemed to tremble on the coming word ,
they toil , they sweat , thick clouds of dust arise ,
the casement open swinging ,
happy children , whom joy takes maying !
and four or five they reckon makes a large - sized family .
all have come out to the day 's broad light .
rising morn "                 allan ramsay
be the wilde beasts , that swiftest are in chase ;
and of elegant conception .
and golden the buttercup blooms by the way ,
sweet , for a season ;
to him which makth continuance
roast the ox and stick the boar !
cheer me when sad , advise me when i stray ,
annie of tharaw , my riches , my good ,
but faith -- that nothing ever shall confound .
profoundly pathetic ?
the dream had not implied an incubus ;
a way with shadows overspread ;
whose innocent soft faces might
broutée , fleur hypocrite , fleur du silence .
dow , dowe , am ( is or are ) able , can .
she will frisk with jack and bess ;
rang down the idle lanes of sleep ;
see , with what heat these dogs of hell advance
my mother set my wigwam beside her lodge .
ever he maketh the way appear . "
draw my coat closer with my numbèd hands ,
uix instillato restituenda mero ,
in toil at an attorney 's desk ,
the sleeping leaves , is all the light they wish ,
this is the farmer 's wife , plucking with care
as well in darkness as in light ,
" o dinna you mind now , love gregor ,
then join'd again the foremost in the fray .
and sooth'd the sorrows of her infant breast .
some race of old humanity
xlviii . each side strives hard the other 's ground to win .
yes ; he whose life ’s short span appears
with montfort 's hate and basil 's love ,
within the embryonic snail
there fore s{ir } torent wold not lett ,
in godfrey 's hearing than you haply deem :
a crowd of bishops , abbots , canons , monks
where some ambitious wave had strayed ,
to stir thy grey waters , of starlight forsaken ,
yet forever , yea , forever we shall see thee rising thus ,
for why?--his owner had a house
of loving from him .   then she feared the worst ;
the chief , retiring : " souls , like that in thee ,
god and his works : creator him they sung ,
what yet i hinna seen ,
unrestrained injustice . the letter contravenes the spirit .
_ fate is the sovereign will of god _ ;
rises as a monster - eagle ,
prophets , and apostles , have taught us by their own failings , the
as you afford it fuel . before this conquest
a bush - browed , beetle - brówed bíllow is it ?
down to the bone the talons went ;
under t ' awd willow tree .
" and all thy brave companions / that hither with thee fare .
you shall not have your books indeed .
who rock'd her cradle with requited care ,
lion , whence its rays fell to earth , mingled with the strong
the presence of drinkers , that fire would reach the hem
but some essayed to doubt if it were so .
belief . " " o holy father , spirit who seest that which thou so
naught but the sea and sky are seen , at last ,
for many nights he dreams of this scene of bliss ,
and pergamus laid level with the ground .
the while brave vasco 's unsuspecting mind
capital city , and village of brown ;
the silly boy , believing she is dead
grinning a welcome ; with a throaty skirl ,
down within the silver sea . "
nor wreck or bulging thou hast cause to fear ;
such war -- the worst they could desire--
there was lord belfast , that by me past ,
do n't butt at the storm with your puny form ,
leaves from you i glean , i write , to be perused best afterwards ,
of what they are to hear and see ,
and sondrily to everich on
she stoops in pity above the labouring earth ,
thy songs , o maevius , ay , and therewithal
like a madman on a drum !
out of its stalwart trunk and limbs , out of its foot - thick bark ,
and i still willing all their brats to own .
said he , " and let the destin'd years come round . "
oppida circumvectitabor , ubi nobilitas mea erit clara ,
strength swells thy boiling breast , infused by me ,
timber enough , by good advice select ,
to get the pearl and gold ,
the daisy from the dust .
that parboiled imp , with the hardest jaw you will see
still strong in chains .
the duke and lord alfred again , thro ' the glooms
than you are ,
this rurall wreath dares be thy sacrifice .
come warriors willing , should war draw nigh ,
a parrot sways upon a tree ,
let him be rich and weary , that at least ,
a little stuff may furnish out their cloaks .
dost recognize thy wife ? ' twas thus of old i fled .
half - devil and half - god ,
lips laugh and drink , but never
when they meet each other :
doubt ; for , although in no way , and at no time ,
the venerable minister who instructed his childhood , and laid his
from the proud archer strike his vaunted bow :
to the rear , like relatives
then we two should we d.
impetuous , from conflicting vapours sprung ,
we should soon learn which of us twain usurps
i wonder , bill , if ' ans and fritz is wonderin ' like me
the sins of gluttony , with woe erewhile
long have i sat on this disastrous shore ,
it stood . no two men , mightiest of a land
and showeth man most utterly beguiled ,
safe in the love of heaven , an ocean flows
my father vanquished therewithal his visage doth upraise ,
with drip acerb
the soond that hurtled oot when'er
singing charms and incantations ,
therewith he gave the thralls his weapons of war . then they
me foiling , win the mule . i boast myself
i am the self - consumer of my woes ,
where’er you will you force a way ,
come , o come to my lake if you must sit idle .
then supperless he laid him down
kings , stephen ouros , who died in 1307 , imitated the coin of
shuddering at its charnel breath --
take on a tender tone .
is sweet and sharp : " i gave my sacred zone
all misty vapours , and the welkin cleares ,
now irish papists -- fact surprising--
her face leaned out and took the sacred glow
that cradled in their folds the infant dawn .
she needed , virtue - proof ; no thought infirm
they are past its burden and bitterness ;
" listen ! " cried the big blue - gum . " do you hear that ? "
the sword of heav'n is not in haste to smite ,
slowly their souls swam up again , through gleams
considerd all things visible in heav'n ,
both leaders :     and every sweetheart had four hundred swans .
grudge not to say , may ovid rest in peace ! "
you naughty kittens ! "
and the brain dances to the mantling bowl .
' o lord almighty , i must get away ;
or love , the flower that closes up for fear
for somebody might shake it , and the sand
on each bud and blossom ,
idle and still .   against the sunset glow
as rich as _ cleopatra _ gaue her loue .
" he made him swear that he , for nothing said ,
and her face with tears is wet .
knell for the onset !
go till the word is war -- and then you will find me .
survived the ruins of that day ,
and quenched my fever utterly ,
lotus - maiden , may you be
x was once a great king xerxes ,
and there is no more time for anything
and well proportioned frame
and , so refused , might in opinion stand
and drooping downward wearily
while heaven looks down through calm unmeasured miles .
how fate was woven round her , and the souls
went a - sailing on the ' c. ' _ "
where cold and unhonored his relics are laid :
the star , the bird , the fish , the shell , the flower ,
come to me , little sheemah , thou shalt dwell
to meet the hermit boy they hied ,
and must i wait till science give
" think of it : for three dollars a year i buy a season - ticket
" go ye to that stately chamber
the vulcan , wi ' his arm o ' micht ,
such self - deceit may pardon'd be ;
_ and our heads went round , and the stars went round ,
i saw her anger waxing hot ,
you were bewilder'd in a paltry dream
with alternating draw and whiff ,
where sorrows never come .
or sit aloft , thy hands brimmed full of stars ,
i saw it fall in smoke and fire , the banner of the bhao ;
as lucagus , to lash his horses , bends ,
riley was nodding to the floor
determined to take him into princeton , and hand him over to the
and all the world would stare ,
recall him to his noble acts and deeds !
for she i loved was then a maid no more .
from where the bushes thinlier crested
they rush , with heart - born laughter loud ;
i 've heard her thoroughly described
where is the caitiff ? "   on maremma 's marsh
bends low upon my breast her regal star - crowned tresses
of fishes and corals under the waves ,
until a queen 's hand i had set
and thence , of purest white , bright rays outstream ;
" thy will obeying , i call up afresh
the western main shook growling and still gnawed .
at first the silent lips made no reply ,
which took me reading in the sacred book ,
and on the vexing portrait
( for oft when he takes up his razor , to strap it ,
i shall be then a garden charmed from changing ,
than any blooming flower that blows .
conspexere , silent , arrectisque auribus adstant :
the ardent silence and the mystery
in supplication and in parable
which from all other purposes removed me ,
" woe 's me ! "   the spirit lighted thus himself ,
surged a crowd of the curious ; all eyes were bent
thou wast not born for death , immortal bird !
it stirred the boughs of giant gums and stalwart ironbark ;
begins his course , while earth with glad amaze
a little way remov'd , the heralds slew
strappit flaught owre his braid saddle - bow ?
great without seeking to be great
reaches to some woman 's heart .
moreover you have told the story of your own misfortunes , and
and industry and law maintain their sway severe . "
and he spoke the words which follow :
spirit .   the odjibwa - algonquins , who call it mon - da - min , that is ,
and bright the sunshine streamed in there ,
i saw the heavens in warre against her rize :
full - armed the fear was born and grew ,
was nursed in silence and in shame !
with a fal - the - ral - a , etc .
that , if the common people were to see it ,
make swift the feet and straight the way
this beauty is .   i turn aside and taste
hears a hero - cry of anguish .
high on his shoulders sat the child ,
con otros nocturnos juegos
bought are the fasces , and the people sell
who keeps aloof from fate -- while yet he can ;
she 'd scorn our simple country life ,
where laden spits , warp'd with large ribs of beef ,
in number such from ships and tents effused ,
you need not shake your flowing locks at me--
in after days he also became the possessor of the farm , called
and take our bachelors instead ;
at him the long - haired grecians bent their bows ,
withstood the shock ;
whose days went sighing
closely sewed the bark together ,
hence uttama her son , the fortunate !
of crowns , with which the king , thy spouse ,
helth as well as welth , yes verely
thus coldly and unlovingly to greet
over the bed from chime to chime ,
sometimes , when on the alpine rose
breaking through its shields of shadow ,
" nor tempt the vengeance of their god too far :
cupid ( warming his hands )
" remote , unfriended , melancholy , slow " .   mitford ( aldine
so spake the false dissembler unperceivd ;
our sad decay in church and state
with statis of this and many a other region .
you 'd better take back just a few !
" but why do you go ? " said the lady , while both sat under the yew ,
is a brilliant summer - sun ,
then at the last , odysseus of many counsels spake to his
but old style fence doth waste much land ,
the snow and sleet perturbit all the air ,
though undoubtedly banns are the cheapest . "
the spirit , first , of my companion came ,
and first some oaths they swore by candle light
' twill touch me to the very heart oh !
and drawn them off the spits , they divided the messes and
ich seh sie noch , ihr büchlein in der hand ,
if signs of yielding he might trace ; but they
because you walk before and crush the brier ,
let their bleached bones , and blood 's unbleaching stain ,
let the lynxes snarl in greenwood ,
then a pebble of podge took the knight , sir stodge ,
" may _ think _ ( tender tyrants ! ) of loosening his chains . "
that trickle down the branches , fast congealed ,
where the trestle groans and quivers in the snow ,
e'en circe wept , her adamantine heart
nothing of such a heaven guess'd ?
and life atones with speed and plenitude
" white are both the great kenabeeks ,
of ráma ’s vengeance sink :
  the famous thomas a becket , feigned by the poets to have been
by loss o ' blood or want of breath ,
dismounted then , and went -- his heart was full ,
and say love , too,--and politics , moreover , say ,
drinks the new tints , the sweets unknown inhales ,
and all - alike to be a song !
begins----"statesmen and morals i impeach ,
of the high country two , two of the low
to fight they went , no jest they meant ,
and cometh , harvest ?   i say unto you ,
that may cause you tears at night .
nunca tales guardas ví .
from me again ' twill ne'er depart ,
" you fly too swiftly past . ah , you might stay
another chorus now succeeds ,
with wind - notes as of eagles aeschylean ,
least some small acknowledgment , of his unworthy scholar ,
it whispers to us all day long
have vanisht with its beams
to freedom 's duty giving ,
where , by the sacrificing minister ,
yet to these four in three things the same luck holds ,
in all my work , in all the children 's play ,
in every street these tunes our ears do greet--
distant harvest - carols clear ;
earring , or stone ,
the nameless author , better known than read--
the coloured glory of the pictured windows
i come from castlepatrick , and me heart is on me sleeve ,
that toilsome path led up to god .
and we 'd be such a merry , merry band ,
( 4 ) the ruh - sheng , or straight and abruptly finished note .
instead of slumber -- not to prayer
than scourging of women , and robbing the poor !
and live sumptuously on the interest .
non freta longinquis maeotia piscibus explent .
“ when , known from far , she heard his dying groans ;
all settled .   come , jump out and run in and be
strike , england , quickly , make an end
and ridgy wreaths afore me rise ,
eripuit : fixit leges pretio atque refixit .
then he knew to satisfaction
sang for them . as the huntress diana goes forth upon the
unexpected and charming phase .
with loving arms .      i ask how men call me
impendent horrors , threatning hideous fall
inpasti licet inruant leones ,
i never left her -- day and night
and sweet - williamsuz , and these
and then came peace , and gentle beauty came ,
fusus in elysia sic ego ualle moror .
of fire proclaims me thine and bans the pale
thorold is famous for its mills ,
he sends us no sorrows that have not some cure .
if it worrant for summat sho might be a gem ,
and dubious been the nursings there .
entertain a double wish in his mind .
enter prince henry and elsie , with attendants .
unseen but to those worlds above ,
und loafers troo de nederland
of many pagan things .
when sudden i heard her say :
as i went to bonner ,
let us , then , be up and doing ,
touching to tears , strange , hopeless utterly .
to hours of such content and full - veined joy
by the hawk frighted .
soft silken hours ,
fell scythe of death within the year . the light
to - night his soul was like that forest old ,
on another occasion:--
drop wild flowers of the breaking skies
is of such fearful beauty that he dies
" the schoolmaster . " a patriote
but silently and solemnly , in long and straggling line ,
below sierra 's slopes of pine ,
and downward stooping , shunn'd the brazen death ;
yet counting as far as to fifty his years ,
do n't believe i 'd want it jest only pleasant weather ;
from tree - top to spire , and spire to mast ,
“ no maid i ’ve viewed of noble blood
the long rain
came a flock of milk - white peacocks
but your hearts have flown back o'er the waves of the sound ;
his wind - pipe , that without was all o'ersmear'd
symbol of terror and despair ,
henry schnetzen , governor of salza .
and how much less of vacant room inside .
with triple body -- fore , a lion she ;
the lurking bias , be it truth or error ,
" and now there came both mist and snow ,
but know the study , etc .
the constant training for a glorious strife :
his noble life jatáyus gave :
the wiser fools , seeing thy paynim bard
" with festal cheer ,
the gravel to the gate ; the gate - hinge made a sound
this being so , he did not propose to devise any scheme or with
that story seemed to strike me , pal -- it happens every day :
and on his altars wak'd the sleeping fires ;
and died untamed upon the sands
far above the convent stands .
in every useful toil and art ;
their sharpness , ere he is aware .   when thoughts
for only to rogero all attend .
the lips of utter kindliness ,
hands to a comrade , and with arms matched fair ,
thus singing they began ; and afterwards
that stands above the rock :
and , chestnut brown ( once high in my regard ,
slowly she cometh on
each swaggering blade had talked his fill .
his wife by him as sick did lie ,
at his heart are aimed their lances .
" sleep , angry beauty , sleep and fear not me "
neve subducto faciem rubore
--so that ne'er did lady helke / so mighty power wield
thy beauteous face away ,
of herald wings came whispering
when summer is come , a sea - turn
his arms , the hero with his right - hand close
save the uneasy hope of this dear home .
by some old shopkeeper in nuremberg ,
the sexes sprung from shame and pride ,
a sou ' sou ' west was blowin ' up to more than half a gale ,
the lightning hath withered and scorched in its pride
of thee we now should ask forgiving boon ;
you may talk o ' gin an ' beer
" now , as it oft befalls a cavalier
and o'er the web sweet pictures come and go ,
but , that being a rose--'t was enough !
" perhaps the great tree will forget
and ten _ low words _ oft creep in one _ dull line _ .
many again are to be found among the miscellaneous section of
then they summoned chibiabos
her eyes , plait up her hair to see
the monstrous parricide !
this love puts all humanity from me ;
haunted by vain regrets , and pallid , sorrowful faces .
stranger ! i will inform thee true . a seer
of the kisra dynasty .
men with their heads reflect on this and that--
a beauteous ripple of the brilliant stream
while dead leaves on the earth are strown
and , as down his features it trickles and glistens ,
for my dear father ’s injury . ”
and unseen mermaids ' pearly song
along the hillside , cup on cup ,
and this same state we wo n't describe : we would
the six years had not alter'd it :
the deil was in it!--
with dismal , hollow groans the victim falls ;
and tell him what he thought of elenor murray .
till upon me
red as his palms that day ,
old stones weary with the weariness
" let him who lords it o'er th ' ausonian land
repeated by the high - souled throng .
hath need of pause and interval of peace .
had informed him of the counsels of great jove . now , however , she
she gives in large recruits of needful pride ;
" so mend thy pace , " she cried , " that if my words
but like to gobble sweets , instead ,
a homeless land and friendless , but a land
_ of all my verse , like not a single line ;
iam noxa letalis suum
one common blessing , as one common soul .
and bear the affrighted goddess to the skies ?
now the world awakes anew ,
thogh thou coveite it everemore ,
a cloak brushes aside ,
for as of those who to death were done
the way that goes , my feet that stir .
escaping these , she hit a liveried arm ,
faith from one soul unto another ; so
mean , or in her summd up , in her containd
the terrestrial paradise ? if thou pardonest me when
for close the knights of tronje / upon their enemies chased ,
why , i might wake her up and startle her .
i ai nt a wig , i ai nt a tory ,
and ask't me if i ment as i profest ,
" faithful mother , well - beloved ,
and red rivers running through them ,
look in the shining west ,
por l[a eu]rop[a i]nfeliz .
i sho ' loves dat gal dat dey calls sally " black , "
flowed ' round you in rivers of white .
and preachers and poets have proved it is so
an ' a lum hat wantin ' the croon !
and cloths and couches live with flame
white laurustine , seems in my hand to be
sweet mother , do ye love the child ? '   she laughed ,
mixed on the bleeding stream , by floating hosts oppressed .
nor spiritless , nor altogether void
als auf einer feuerleiter .
old homes ! old hearts ! upon my soul forever
shot heaven - bred horror through the grecian ’s heart ;
and the snows of ages were scattered around ;
the life which he liv'd there , both for the sake
i thought of this , and i was glad ,
many rich draughts hath memory ,
as beautiful kitty one morning was tripping ,
pavilions numberless , and sudden reard ,
pours down its wintry torrent on the plain ;
with his axe he smote the tree - trunks ,
into green waves the prairie 's grassy lake ,
and quiet the words he says :
and the cuban palm - tree dreamily stirs
awaiting there my mandate to descend .
over the copse -- beyond the hills ;
as i did , riding through the city gate ,
who is it hurrieth by ?
he hath in sooth good cause for endless grief ,
and no one to my call .
oh , loosen the snood that you wear , janette ,
what land ? what people ? who inhabit here ?
god finished woman in the twilight hour
or the steep walls obstructed , round them cast
these two came later every night
there came into many a burgher 's pate
thus hazarding at last to make it less .
' mong those , of whom thou question'st , " he replied ,
look to the life that was lavished for thee !
plains turn to lakes , and villages are drowned ,
and is it now my turn , ye mighty powers !
woodyatt , this christmas i devote
as hesper , large and brilliant , leads the night !
and conveyed the bulky sampo ,
which now ( one stray sunbeam upon it ) shook , stoop'd
with favoring winds , o'er sunlit seas ,
but so oddly does heaven its bounties dispense ,
leaves us here in gloom ;
i never call a man a boob who toils throughout the night
he breaks the seal and casts the wax aside ,
they watched the piling clouds . with angry roar
this mai a king wel understonde ,
that i did not understand .
yet the commonest thing in the world is unrest ,
it was the hour of night , when thus the son
nor prate to men of your courage stout ,
the sugar - tongs answered distinctly , " of course ! "
plunged herself into destruction ,
p. 64 . _ clough._--from _ amours de voyage _ , canto iii . there is a
so far above their fellow - men ,
one hand clasps ours , one heart believes us true ;
with those first loves that never come again .
some smithfield saint did jealous feelings tell
a single and indifferent arbiter ,
found all the bathroom pipes with tea - leaves filled .
you could almost say : brand new--
the supper we had , sir , and when it was over
as they neared the ahti - dwellings ,
' tis virtue gaily visible !
for it must lead to a happy land ,
in saratoga shaw , man .
" over our white souls also
and huge mr . little broke down in a gig ,
wiped the cold dew - drops from his cheek
obedient to the moorish wizard flew ,
the same to his heart and for mere love 's sake
as o'er the earth it wanders wide ,
buoyed and lifted by the south - wind ,
besides , old prophecies augment her fears ;
and still the cup was full,--while he afraid
" as much as i your minstrelsy ,
de su esclarecido deudo .
a girl bare - footed brings , and tumbles
he made adam the sexte day
they manfully have led the van .
a foe to tyrants ! one your pen restores:--
" when i was one - and - twenty "   alfred edward housman
and such a lot , my skene , was thine ,
without one smile of favour from the great ;
do not lose heart , timid thing ! your bonds will burst , the bud
and we pay homage
sith all your tempests can not hold me backe ,
one yarn you told me in those days i can remember still ;
all beauty , like a strength where graces cling,--
while death ’s strong pangs distend his labouring side ,
in their grocery stores in flourishin ' towns
firm to his first intent , he thus replies :
lest my dear readers feel themselves annoyed ,
myself i saw him of our folk two hapless bodies take
his girth laid right down on the ground .
i mean if sweet prudence the subject maintain ;
" between the king of rivers ' horns , " ( he cries , )
one foot he held uplifted ; to the ground
it holds you as fast as the cage holds a linnet ;
and celebrate due spousals with the maid .
hoc erit tibi argumentum semper in promptu situm :
alas , i had been dreaming
come with me ;
to the island chorus hand your measures on ,
insomuche as we be to you comen ,
_ the witch 's child _
the arid earth absorbs ; furious some rush ,
now from yon hamlets clouds of smoke arise ,
the swamp - oak , with his royal purple on ,
" chris'mus comes but onc't a year ! "
my dear _ daily mail _ ,
and the toper he hiccuped -- which hindered an oath--
sent disease and death among us ! "
she 's the picture of health , and a southern - born thing
till it drew itself together ,
yet if we could scorn
shall bring deliverance unto every land .
we 'll charge the invading host ,
him , hovering o'er his head , the form address'd .
as one who hears not , whatsoe'er is said ;
forgetting that poor worms endure
" ' twas from below ! " thus bigotry in rage .
o'er life , too sweet an image for such glass ,
so sprang the clear voice of aeacides .
remember adam 's fall
i should have had the legacy ,
made himself consort
in a quiet bed ;
he likes his saul less than his gear .
either to other ; and thereunder crept odysseus and anon he
and all that my assistance want ,
hath goodness infinite , that it receives
of early candle - lighting .
for brief repast or afternoon repose
rich caparisoned , must be his by right
to own . it 's not a book or toy ;
in days of a long gone
over the edges of the sky ,
till raging monsters , music - charmed , he kills .
so long have mingled with the gusty wind
has marked a distant object down ,
where he leads through day or night .
in lingering lab'rinths creep ,
“ angor , thou scatterer of the brave ,
but just a roving rhyme ,
in fain all dings let fall ,
on green judea 's plain ;
" now at length i 'll tell you truly .
to nature grant relief .
his wif , he hath his weie take
goodness , how time flies !
" oranges and lemons , "
" all aboard ! " i exclaimed as i cranked the machine ,
' and this locket , i unclasped it
who reigns above , a rebel to his law ,
and looks unskill'd in any art ;
he , too , was struck , and day by day
on his nose find his chin ,
one picture , just one more,--the virgin 's face ,
him dido now with blandishment detains ;
he has loupen on the bonny gray ,
" he whose coins are kept for counting , not to barter nor to give ,
never an echo
about him , and the change and not the change ,
with eyes full of love ,
peculiarities , which have led many of our editors altogether
shot singing onwards to the sunlit mere .
serve thee for everlasting to this toil . "
“ and joy this clime at such a distance lies ,
then he looked , and turned on all sides ,
a thousand times of him had made an end ;
" come in , " said the mevrouw , softly .
that gives the happy chance of doing good ,
and from infinity there fell a balm ,
till west is east beside our land - locked blue ;
and all go back unto the plough
their works shall with the world remain :
con well thy lesson o'er ,
hill .   and lot , the blessed , dear unto god and faithful , abode
i feel a choking in my throat ,
a soldier 's doing ! what atones ?
it was only to hear the yorlin sing ,
auld rob maintain'd them baith , and wi ' tears in his e'e
where love and thou that lasting bargain made .
love 's martyr , it might breed idolatry
fields and farm lands , follow briskly behind the waggon along
o'er all that flutter their wings and fly
for mortal men his sov'reign will resist ;
to whom belongs this flock , damoetas , pray :
of the wide world !
each in their several active spheres assigned ,
as the long train southward rolled ;
and to retain is highest gain .
is half a rose - bud -- half - a - crown !
sitting down to tea ;
when death foils love we know not what to know .
is anyone now within sight ?
to win her in this woeful hour !
that bold columbus of the realms of wit ,
and lo ! this civilised and boasted plan ,
as i came from the train ;
rebecca standing by his couch .
yet cloth'd in corruptible flesh , among
mark this , i beg of thee !
hail to your purlieus ,
and my lips grew parched like a man athirst
" if love hath made one thought his own ,
all these things did hiawatha
and of the sentient silences
he 's rotten spoiled , and ought to be suppressed .
told them of the virgin mary ,
saw bright against the window - pane
but loathsomeness and ruin?--
lo , in her eyes all dreams that ever were !
and mount 's ambition 's ladder:--
and an angry snake was he , oh .
as if the church were glorified , doth smile .
and hidden , dispers'd truths that folded lie
yet it seemed not so to me ;
look on their poverty of education !
repent the day that they were born .
the straight , white , rigid clip of teeth .
" i ca n't tell you if i try .
virgarum implicat ordinem severum ,
through the silent street , till their horses turned
as the sighing , singing branches
represented on a public stage in his time .
he leaps into the saddle sure and bold .
ipsa tibi facit ara preces . tu jam illius audi ,
had not their sovereign from his chariot - seat
the white lotus - flower
but when , still swimming , to the mouth he came
a happy fate is mine , i ween ,
go quick .   they 're waiting for you .   you are late .
that has grieved his god , is in the ship . ]
with those just spirits that wear victorious palms ,
hereafter in that world where all are pure
which each , as with one draught he quaffed the liquor
two heavy logs he lashed , and launched them out ,
fain would he flee , his fastness seek ,
while tears and sobs her utterance broke :
ay ! ' was not my brother that first thy favors won .
undiscovered country , the      _ edmund clarence stedman _
under th ' inevitable curb , reserv'd
corrupted .   i at first with two fair gifts
sae look na ' sae lightly on me !
ye tower her up , as danae was ;
o lord of work and peace ! o lord of life !
mixed a small supply of ashes ,
at least we saw no giants .
of having wished to change his place .
judicial or profane , are banished from
sal iver seawards glide .
as grain out of the chaff
as to topper two lubbers for killing a pig ! "
for all our works a recompense is sure , ii . 93 .
to love her , the fashion ;
survey'd , and sometimes went , and sometimes ran
divergence deep and wide .
and he sold him in carelia ,
and at the end the gleamin ' spark !
sojourns less distant on his homeward way ,
and here are blossoms like to stars
in the hands of lovely maiden ,
the waves about iona dirge ,
they know that spain and fate to - day unite ;
but one was so feminine , soft eyed and fair
climbed upon a mountain summit ,
coeperat et somno lassatas sumere uiris ;
our hearts and lips together .
hero , old enough for wedlock ;
thou hast my earlier friends , the good , the kind ,
attend and learn from _ dulness ' _ sleeping shade ,
of thy own daughters , vengeance came
in tense expectancy , and all her face
page 113.--the angel is the legend of genius .
but ill - conducting , that hath turn'd the world
when at the world 's last session ,
can nevermore depart !
tim whiffler may yet prove a tartar ,
you will have to fight till the last man falls
lo , lo , increasing lustre , torrid breath to the nostrils ; lo ,
no man knows . _
if that strange poet - princess with her grand
hadde in his swevene , ther he lay :
my wearying strife ,
' no , no , ' " how then ? " ' why dare i tell
a lesson you have said ;
my little lambs are folded like the flocks ;
still , seeing thee , have faith in human worth ,
and when sunset may breathe , from the lit sea beneath
who loads you like this , beyond reason and right ?
dross hath its ministry no less than gold ;
sprung molten from the fierce embrace of stars ,
fu ' fast this day !
bothwell ( _ embracing her _ ) . be a salamander ,
full tenderly and blithesomely
and when his true knight raised him , heavily
so if you 'll have me , jenny , let us appoint the day . "
and held his philosophic school
and learn that truth and wisdom
for i have heard it is a life in death ,
that if the burkes saw what was originally written of them the
on the cornfields far apart ;
not fail him for that labour of delight ,
this is the song that made
sense , though of sorrow,--memory , though of sin,--
if death be an eternal sleep ,
the beggar might have conquered if he would ,
that thus the darling brought ,
and french was through to kimberley to drive the boers away .
and blest be the day i did it again .
but all apparelled as in days of old ,
und from la sauveniere ;
from virtue , which is reason , that no wrong ,
the gloomy grotto makes a doubtful day .
though ne'er , that earliest parting past ,
knew what a cruel slaughter had ensued :
and placed the beaming helmet on the ground ;
the snow may be the silent sound
_ this is the ballad of boh da thone ,
slouching along in smelly rags , a bleary - eyed , no - good bum ;
i measure the remembered place i seek . "
in the colourless passionate bloom
in scotland with the jacobites .
a good thing for someone to take up the running . "
with godlike priam , who , he thought , withheld
nor e'er did billows with more graceful glide
with downcast eyes and modest grace ;
thou who , though still alive , art visiting
as was his wo nt , then bowing low ,
got , to his astonishment ,
the hillside vines dear memories of thee bring :
ande criste thee save and se ! ’
for well she knew , i could not choose
adde then to these a soul so truly mild ,
people liked him , not because
whom else no creature can behold ; on thee
what conscience dictates to be done ,
and the sultry seas of the caribbees
of mimes , a motley crew ,
were only feigned , designed to cheer
of a panther , in circles around her , first wide .
outros quebrao co peito duro a barra . "
what time her wide eyes sought all ways , or loomed
applied to your slim fairyhood 's green limbs
but these less taste them , as they worse obtain .
o blessed lady , who dost hold
let him be quick , the viand flits ,
in sequent toil all forwards do contend .
would ever have thought that in one place
the poem was accompanied by a letter .
when the earth was first created ,
drawing to heaven with gentlest band
from belly - band , and crupper - rope , and tail ;
at last by starvation and famine made bold ,
breathes the false incense of his fatal sigh .
in eden on the humid flowers , that breathed
rester sous le coup de l'interdit littéraire et des dédains
i always thought cold victual nice;--
for ' twixt a faithful and a paynim wight ,
while shielded by his son 's defence the father gat him gone ,
breathed those dear lips to me ;
great words he is compelled to speak
" what news ? " they roared . " i only know ,
there seated , mutual converse close they held ,
white marble paves the silent street
drums against drums , the neighing of the horse ,
forthwith his former state and being forgets--
a right good fellow , mingled he :
and exhortation of my frugal dame .
the foolish hope that once had glittered there--
and he cut the fish to pieces ,
my lips clave to his with a kiss ,
our children shall behold his fame ,
i knelt by him to forgive ;
and when his body passed to earth again ,
in paradise against degenerate popes
wounds of a bloody red,--
blynde nat thy herte with mondayne wretchednes
since he knew good from ill ; ogier the dane ,
vilest thing of god 's creation ,
and lets us see so many things outside
o robin dear !
beside the shore .
throbbed with sweet scent , and smote their souls with love .
o dwellers on the lovely earth ,
with maids of matchless beauty and parentage unguessed ,
than hawk or swallow on the wing , he spurs
wi ' sighs an ' sobs she thus began
he hasted ( not to intermit his toil ) ,
and one from his high window , looking down ,
loanin , the private road leading to a farm .
from his cradle in the glamourie
this vice veine gloire is hote ,
wilt find intact upon its stem the flower
the wind , the tempest roaring high ,
to take this trouble seriously ,
bear with me ; but , oh blessed day ,
tightly clutching the white flower of destruction
suffice it thee , and smite earth with thy heels ,
balen and balan , sure of hand ,
when young and old in circle
i would not lead you willingly astray ,
like an eye that searched the night .
through dusty years , and drearily ,
and horries;--and had patent rollers and scrapers ,
emunctæ naris , durus componere versus .
a truce , with olive branches in their hand ;
humbly unto thy mercy - seat :
with secret deeds of darkness , had begun
to their owne dance ; now negligently rash
from loves and hates at one with one another .
and after slays with merciful sudden death--
she lifted up her voice and cried :
while buxom wenches are and stoops of sack .
courteous he was , lowly , and serviceable ,
the sunbeams pave o'er the crystal waters
by stronger links than steel ;
bringing floats of aspen - timber ,
never that lion bore crown that was foreign ,
till came thy summons to the court above .
jawbone , ring ! jawbone , sing !
sponte sua uolitent aeterno percita motu ,
even the laurels and the tamarisks wept ;
of simultaneous , energetic will ;
before it stained a single human breast .
we 'll still sit up ,
before his ray the shadows fly ,
their warriors forth from farthest lycia , where
bubbly - jock , turkey .
we reared such stones to the sun - god
devouring . ]
te quoque credibilest aliqua caluisse puella ;
and saw a woman wondrous fair ,
we are one against ten thousand ! we will seek
now and then a wall in passing .
with everything beauteous that grows in the deep ;
and mangled bore away the sinewy part .
a little child -- no more .
seeing ' twas morn , and spring - tide of the year ;
such pressing need , in that he had to fight
and let the dead folk bury their dead .
ne kinde , and that is noght honeste ,
now ere the saint resolve to bring
richer than a paradise of flowers
the first commerce is , and the next command .
the fruit of the apple tree .
but for the chough thou never had'st been married ;
and , which gives work of more ado ,
" this is a magic fire , a magic room . "
now change we arms , and prove to either host
the merle , in his noontide bow'r ,
these elect of cupid prove .
and he will find the c for clown
his herte slow , as thoughte him , for distresse .
with plump , soft flesh , of metal pure and fine ,
while onward rushed the thunderous stream
dragged through the wildest life , will i enslave him ,
' strange lady , surely to thee above all womankind the
have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome ?
down to these worlds i trod the dismal way ,
she entered with her weary smile ,
nor thinking that beneath such manly cheer
towards the noble race of bears--
ah lucasta , why so chaste ?
wraps silvered ermine round him while he may ,
then ráma nobly calm allayed
only the trees to toss and reel ,
scarce fit to be the wand'ring beggar 's home .
so he very soon went back to dover .
and here 's his autograph . "
and thou the blossom blooming there ,
unless thy love were mingled there ,
and idle lay , though soon to rise again .
' yes -- yess ; if the south saxons did not convert me , ' said the
of all sorts , lest he burthen thee and thine .
are writt'n , but now his nephew is no more ;
as if the palpitating dawn drew breath
and send up vows from rosamonda 's lake ;
you wooed me , and won me as lover ,
but as time passed on , and i met real sorrow ,
wind - sighings , doves ' melodious moans ,
not dreaming of a hell below ;
by you the coliseum flourished ;
of the building bee ,
where foresters or shepherds dwell ,
from him , for whom she morneth night and day ,
to - night you will certainly meet with us there ,
i must go forth into the town ,
dew - drop , a bud , and a star ,
we saw the greasy hempen rope
marvels none on land or sea .
is a small cedar grove ; where broken winds
in realms immense , begins her western line .
that the hand of jove was with him . he would even have set fire
here , happie creature , fair angelic eve ,
apollo , urged æneas to assail
and just as human as they ever were .
legs , darkish , with a big head , keen eyes , a red face , and
more than aurora 's smile the swain forlorn ,
" does he mean himself , i wonder ?
the angels from his visage splendid
the year 's grown songless ! no glad pipings thrill
none do here
o happy hours and fleet,--
a sketch of the alps , etc . , = 158=
such griefs i owe ; so true it is and sure ,
where he abides that mine oft moistes and washeth :
the dome was fair as heaven , or heaven , in sooth ,
lure us from the camp away .
his falchion on a flint he softly smiteth ,
deep in the ribs of the metropolis .
with his own thought , he open'd wide his arm
flapped in the branches , and glared , and croaked and croaked ,
but when my dear these blossoms holds ,
i met with wisdom laughing in the sun ;
and bitter words , the trembling sire dismiss'd .
but they wheeled their tracks with a wild beast 's skill ,
till it is time to go to bed .
that , when fogs are thick on the harbor reef ,
to gather matter for a serious piece ;
from sound or sight , with hearing strangely dull
here , mid the bleak waves of our strife and care ,
let the king 's foes admire
that as for man being made of mud ,
he took her in his arms and bore her right
from vermin , was a pity .
and still he power on earth retains ,
our king a laurel -- evergreen--
nature , i lie once again!--ah , and ' twas only a dream
and fight out pain 's battles where men run away .
i keep a faded ribbon string
in whatsoever manner / my help may given be ,
nicholas had sore work to console his little sister , and betsey 's
laden with the woodland 's heart !
he adored beauty , in pure ecstasy ,
but clear as words can make revealing ,
sings as she skips ,
haply by pity moved , be hither led . "
part of which comes true , and part
but a headless spear , while the bronze point flew some way off
and when the kitchen chimney smokes ,
the village smithy stands ;
doubtless her husband feels no more
he tryes his strength , his active fingers flye
a watchful sprite , and ariel is my name .
and the swift hounds , affrighted as he flies ,
ralph , the artist spake again--
hearing related , would as falsehoods slight .
and the open window of the room ,
  alexander the great , who claimed to be the son of jupiter ammon .
till , feeling the wind blow cold
then it grew so tall
blest be thy bloom , thou lovely gem ,
and her lids , close as sleep ,
glaciers , volcanos , oranges , and ices .
a son not worse than thy machaon , good
by his will your heads are lifted ;
and the wind that blew behind him
how would he lift his aged arms on high ,
to an eastern field of battle .
in attitude and action .   i have only
prattle , prattle , rattle , rattle ,
of inner movements gain a sight .
till it swims like the lark in a sea of skies .
now let not christians who from him may differ
i throw the wee stools o'er the mickle ,
when he galloped into lexington .
and i ought to have told my best friend long ago ,
to leave it there !   i can not tell
wicked witch that sent these troubles ,
" encrease and multiply , " was heav'n 's command ,
and told unto his warriors / how they might plainly see ,
a wind is blowing over my soul ,
yf thou hast myster of ony more ,
sensit se fidicen philomela imitante referri ,
these were not guilty , for they were but young ,
nothing in true earnest done .
of all my sons , save hector alone , wast thou !
whose favours run now here , now there .
and weep the more because i weep in vain _ .
" listen now to what i tell thee ,
thus i said the other day ,
scarce was it said when quick a thought ,
from contact with the air ; beneath the waves
in curru biiugos agitare leones
my lady 's train is for knights of a fair arraying ;
the days when every mead was fair , and every heart was true ,
wi ' his blue bonnet on his head ,
as in earlier days ;
and dress thy grave with pearly dew .
he even seeketh not to please god more
to smash and destroy you in war !
and a pretty sharp quarrel had we ;
for love was offered me and i shrank from its disillusionment ;
within them was the twofold monster shining ,
comest thou here , so late , to be forgiven ,
carol her goodness loud in rustic lays ,
even by those who ought to give her praise , giving her blame
to think . there is no circle in rome more free from self - seeking
in such guise that she could make nothing of it .
and those whom idomen from ilion 's plain
where that damned wizard , hid in sly disguise
so will they speak , and so shall we be shamed .
as other men ; and yet my soul is true .
and when i at last must throw off this frail cov'ring
yes , everything is wanting , gallant bird !
now herkne , freend , for thus it stant with me .
across the shoulders came the feather'd wound ;
and bid him timely to my charge succeed ,
i repeat them as i heard them
for if iron to mana brought you ,
a ship upon the sea ,
but to my tortured memory rise
pull away , jolly boys !
transpierced ; his mail sufficed not , but the spear
north and south alike , each land
on christmas eve the brig content
her sweet face into shadow , dull and slow ,
white rounded firmness , and each body alert
wedged tight along a line of red ,
nay , mother , nay ! not he , not he ;
how some grow wise and some grow cold ,
looked beneath the magic vessel ,
that sweeps the golden shore ,
bid thee with wife and brother see
pleased with herself , nor sad nor gay ;
with shrieks strangled by wind and wave and terror .
eyes that love you , arms that hold ,
with her fine snowy fingers she rais'd his stately head ,
vain will seem the impatient heart , which waited
so long as he for human right shall stand ,
polluting dust o'er every reverend head ;
up leapt the waters where he fell .
and of this constellacioun
so that beholding her distraught and wistful ,
her condescension called him friend ,
the many years of pain that taught me art !
" meta , i take my departure . if nothing is heard of me to - day or
this rock affords not , shiver'd to the base
a health to the native - born ! _
touch god 's right hand in that darkness
montaignac , and knows also the song he made when she would
mother , it 's such a weary strain
nine and seventy years ago ,
those without arms to strike , the lost of israel .
is mostly strangled in the tide .
with lusty arms he cleaves the waves ,
brighter burden never were
at this unwelcome news !
for if you ' ave lost more than us , you crumpled up the square !
and proudly rising over all ,
then i held my breath with fear and dread
no smile can ease mine eyes of care
the old moon laughed and sung a song ,
in guise of the first truth that man believes .
and every peer , expressive of his heart ,
sir guy , _ being in the court of a pagan castle _ .
not forgetting william 's word ,
hands in the gory play .   sooth , little spur
we had it alone from nun 's wood whin . "
lighting up the mournful forest ,
but the kissed lips of love and fair life everlasting !
rise ever higher ; those of the second mode
on the sahri - plains and pastures ,
repent ! repent ! repent !
macchiavelli , _ il principe _ .
cross - patch , draw the latch ,
the man on whom those beauties glanced
there dan deronda reels and falls , a hero sore surprised ;
think , o think , it worth enjoying :
ance ye were streekit o'er frae bank to bank !
therefore it god behoved in his own ways
because its coming did not find you there !
and the sunset borrow a brighter glow
in poetry and art,--whose deeds and lifework all
when the morning of the morrow waken'd ,
the theatre to make and to devise .
and that he comes laden with riches home .
such was the music of the ancients , and to such purposes was it
thy blessed father lives again ,
wafts the leaves that are searest ,
adam and eve appear , then their myriad progeny after them ,
gathered for their magic virtues ,
fullness to such a burden is
in the city , in the town ,
bueno es ser comedido , mas no tanto
regarding this , " says james hogg , " as rather a trivial poem ! " ]
beer is free to soldiers
he chose the brightest , and this new watch
that was the price of this day in june ,
in clean and decent swaddling clothes ,
sets the broad seal of its allegiance there ,
" tell not calista .   she will laugh thee dead ,
trampled by war - hoofs ...
and bahram , that great hunter -- the wild ass
i 've wooed ye mair than ha ' a year ,
your song flits with me everywhere ;
she lives , but she is past sixteen ,
across the lampless room from the one open window to the other ,
i find it full of change ,
with the modest girls have sported ,
of whom the wrytinge is yit now
amazing the unstal - ed eyes of heaven ,
the element of earth , waste and inert , hears at last the cry
for fiery torments ,
hot work ; eh , colonel , was n't it ?   ye mind that narrow front :
this something at my heart that heaves for room ,
and on the landing--
of what swift heaven prepares for them , already
beside him stood a great - headed monk ,
no earth , a mourner 's tread ;
sordidly shifting hands with shades and night .
sweet country , through your rocky valleys last ;
and gallop from the city in hot haste .
to die within the present 's grief of clouds--
the shadow of our fame is growing !
that silent now hang on the wa ' .
afterwards stood .
inactivity of age .
who loved thee , in thy council hall .
the lawe stod er we were bore ,
that they may turn " from darkness unto light , "
but the mirth
if , looking up , he saw not in the sun
mystic songs like these , they chanted .
and pain itself seems sweet when springing
nor sowed , nor reaped , nor delved for the red curse of man ,
are to be fear'd , whence evil may proceed ,
where then will be the memory
footsteps that have gone before .
penolopees trouthe and good alceste .
none of retreat , no unbecoming deed
still louder and more dread :
save that from yonder ivy - mantled tow'r ,
you , and by which you were known among your neighbours and
who may wish to come again .
aeuro ~ and yf a3/4{a}t i were a ryche man~ ,
for gathering nuts and the merry mood
restored to each body the soul that had fled .
sit mute and listen to their beating :
o god , that i had loved a smaller man !
they die ; war bleeds us white .
our happy songs within ; but you will lie
' sister , ' saith fiachra , ' well do i remember
not scatter'd o'er the camp ; by shame restrain'd ,
countless as in the forest , at a first white frosting of autumn
kullervo , kalervo 's offspring ,
laughter ! i know no more of tears and pain . "
i wolde i were of þis worlde wrapped i{n } moldeȝ . ”
the poor man 's wealth , the prisoner 's release ,
others ' reading :   that poesy , thus embraced in all other places ,
sat watching close the bottom of the door .
threw the deer across his shoulder ,
the daring escalade ,
and leaves the rest
by him with many comforts , till we end
whereby , released from slavish fear ,
a song , " my dear mistress
“ swarms of the flower - collecting bee will rise ,
that let the bullet in ;
if there 's a name that angels breathe
spain , or the islands adjoining to it . ]
and then she dwindles to the pigmy kind .
with twenty wild - flowers for one weed ;
yet bring thee memories .
to grander harmonies attain ,
and would work no evil with them .
allured or afraid ,
prophets came ;
( he 'll climb upon the table , that 's his plan ! )
howbeit , he that day acquitted him
to lick , from pointed tail to nape ,
from the river - shores to the hills expand ,
' lazy - livers , runagates , evil beasts , greedy devourers ,
exist created males : since sex proceeds
we faced each other , each measuring the other . and as his glance
' what seek you ? ' is of tyrants in all days .
but now i must think upon thee .
were he but loyal , as a baron true
o me ! the rout ,
thus the warning heralds wandered ,
burst out--"and dares a wolf arraign
some from mere dread of the law 's sentence ,
it is the last night that i can be solitary :
i could do so . furthermore i say -- and lay my saying to your
surely if in the end the epic
all the winter lay .
a dominion like this , that some millions had cost!--
' t is but a fancy .   nature will provide
the blows of a baton ,
earning respect ; have no strange friend ;
to misery . they were all strong and bold
but when john dwyer listed in the blues ,
that his own sons , and servants , wish his end .
lady . nay , gentle shepherd , ill is lost that praise
a multitude , in fury burning , slay
so spake th ' archangel michael , then paus'd ,
of the bold chiefs without ; so year by year
beneath this turf , that formerly he pressed
the statesman tells you , with a sneer ,
al this world was for - lore
that we this hour regain--
on rutila , and change her faultless make
the fortunes of nigel . 2 vols .
he he d a clovven fooit .
then gird them with the heavenly zone .
supremely blest in such a worthy mate ;
zikky wikky mikky bee ,
need was for him to have a steadfast front .
if this be true .   a charge so grievous needs
chorus ( 1 ) women who desire the old thrall .
and ever , night and day , the armed dame
o'er the full banquet , and the sprightly bowl ) ;
as still his moistened lip he fingered ,
spirit born , and schooled for fight ,
tears aid euryalus , and favour pleads
through a subtle semibreve
and now , amid the groves he loved so well
what wilson painted , and what ovid wrote .
the flags anon were hoisted , and forward all would fare ;
but on roland 's heart is a dreary load ,
so lonely , poor , and timid that a rook ,
silence shrinks deeper in
did wound my heart and rend my bleeding chest ,
corporeal , doth proportion its extent
and beaming .
men stood aside and watched , dismayed , aghast ,
bring the bright garlands hither ,
and bends the gallant mast ;
and startling tyrants with the fear of hell
and thou wert mine own , and eden reconquered was mine
opizzo of esti , who in truth was slain by his stepson up there in
distinction between greek , latin , and modern imagination
and then between me and my married wife . ”
" my house , my farm , my days , my nights ,
till first the spirit moves themselves ;
with rosy hand the spicy fruit she brought ,
( so was the warrior hight ) that stream beside ,
the singing nights ; up aloft
chiefs who across the andes ' chain
it takes so long to grow up big and get to be a man ,
he sprang to her in love 's unchallenged might .
--what shall i say?--as a path , were hollowed ,
gave thee her ghost to we d and to be paid ;
and of every bearded man ,
my mother taught me underneath a tree ,
given him . for the sweat caused by the hand that bore the weight
like flakes of crimson light , and the great deep
true " bona - fide traveller "
and , having first invok'd his brother god ,
trailing long ferns of moonlight , shot with green
cool and pleasant on his haunches
or a sigh of such as bring
the things we are for that which we expect ;
evening - song of woe .   a great fear was upon them ; the nets of
thereto gave answer hildebrand : / " from thee reproach like that ?
to spy on his mystery .
with itself,--the vex'd heart 's passing protest on life .
and own stale nonsense which they ne'er invent .
and whence that purity ,
up to the fruit - shaped , perfect chin it lifts !
it was death for him to linger , but he figured if he ran
and never stain a cheek for it .
this is a very cruel world
and when my nightly couch i try ,
so ráma , to his purpose true ,
untraind in armes , where rashness leads not on .
but by a reflected might
an action ' gainst that devil ,
from one side and the other , with loud voice ,
but infinite goodness hath such ample arms ,
in these our hours of need .
sure my father 's steeds will know me ,
' let us move to safer ground ;
nec laestrygonia bacchus in amphora
with turrets high , thick walls , and doors of brass .
they are seen together walking ,
from their beds they sprang and were ready in a trice . a thousand
pale at the blow , and that which at his words
that are quick - eyed pleasure 's foes !
  " do not disgrace the throne of thy glory . "--_jer _ . xiv . 21 .
and love for treason 's sake ;
the motive of my deed .   from out the mouth
in the wayward , restless way ,
angles and morals , in a sky - blue veil ,
o mystic wings of art , about thee truth
¡ ah graves angustias , ah mortal dolor !
we turn and see it in the air ,
concealed , they fashion , crowned with double towers
from a cold wat'ry grave?--
wi ' mornings blythe , and e'enings funny ,
and torneth joies into sorwe .
' extract of nobility'--excellent , since most of them are killed . "
and consider in thy heart in which direction thou wilt
we will stand aside from the battle pride
between the river and the wooded hills ,
curds to eat ,
with an inartistic gusto i can never quite forget .
" hail to sweet fancy 's unexpressive charm !
in which we pass our living days ;
the creatures of his lawless beck ,
to cut the matter short , my friend ,
but lovers now are dead ,
they took their route from berner land ,
all he repeats to the muses , and lest the gods should be anger'd ,
so simply and so earnestly ,
rains thickly from his armouries above ,
to the circle 's bound , beyond the moons and suns ,
in sooth thy lofty kinsmen / have wronged me not at all ,
set the sky on fire behind him ,
neptune ! deliberate thyself , and choose
" eumaeus , this house of ulysses is a very fine place . no matter
and , through the mystic gleam ,
to have white angels singing lauds for them !
how tenderly the moon doth fill the night !
æsepus , granicus , with mingled force ,
flew downward to the mighty flow'r , or rose
shall yeild us , pregnant with infernal flame ,
to lap his careless soul in ease ,
for whose path the atlantic 's level powers
the ebbing wine glides swiftly o'er the tongue ;
ours the homely , garden food ,
then enoch lay long - pondering on his plans ;
an ' there 's a secret , whispered in the dark ,
the viking whose valor      had vanquished the earl .
those footmarks , one by one ,
" to know one secret of her heart ,
he thought : " of gold is ing'borg 's hair ,
now that thou a bride hast taken
" what madness did your fancy guide--
and these encourages , and those reproves .
he loved a flower pot .
i had fled in vain !
( ll . 929a-929 t )   but hera was very angry and quarrelled with her
at the games of lively maidens ,
as women , theft , and bloody affray ?
habit , tradition , phantasy , or youth--
bird thou never wert ,
peacefully his course pursuing
with the first lapse of new - created man ,
shall bear us company to - night ,
be of our kindred ; and the foreign fiend
i asked him how he had done since i saw him last .
at last the trojan dukes of men , mnestheus , serestus fierce ,
with the breeze behind us , on we go ;
near ilus ’ tomb , in order ranged around ,
she gave me tokens three:--
that we may sing thy goodness to the sun . "
the world to ruin ) round pompeius ' tent
most birds of the air could repose ;
as when from jove , the fair - hair'd juno 's lord ,
dear heads , still dark with raven hair ;
out of the woods by the creek cometh a calling for peter
the eager flood bearing thy rugged raft
so lowe so meke paciently to endure
plant or still seed -- know , what is there hath grown
from the surrounding hills to the sea - side ,
more loudly in a _ church _ to bawl :
and at her owne felicitie did smile , " etc . ;
conceives a firebrand . born in evil hour ,
and planted aliens on olympian heights ; -
were also ours :   the casual , intimate
and murmured snatches of delight ;
is this her song , so weirdly strange ,
yet as a trump had done .
foaming waters rushing upward .
him earnestly to do thy bidding , lest ye be displeasing to the
my fastness and fortress ,
yes , the father 's jest has wounded me deeply , i own it ,
this is his hour of separation !
that is,--you knew .
the broad stream bore her far away ,
and learn the lip of bethlehem 's child .
and still they gazed , and still the wonder grew
a little seed , which sown in english ground
why did my summer not begin ?
to realms where nought can perish .
your own are yours to - day .
deep thoughtful eyes and golden kingly brow .
at the inn of night for aye .
this , that , and every base impression .
my heart , have you no wisdom thus to despair ?
like a forlorn woman over - born
when all were entered , and the roving eyes
oh , then the bold knight was angry ,
reverent he made in me my knees and brow ;
and the tread of their delicate feet .
" ' mi a ddaethum yma at weddillion troia ; '
as tho ' they had not been men .
within the farmer 's meadow a brown - eyed daisy blows ,
the poets of the t`ang dynasty
a sory man was he ;
europe is seen to clothe herself afresh ,
and is a tangle round ,
how shall the summer arise in joy ,
“ astonish'd at the miracle they gaze ;
from ida 's height ; and from amid the spears
i did not make my love my wife
still are his entrails fruitful to their pains :
and each , obedient , to his bench repair'd .
on a day , alack the day !
so warm her gaze the blood rushed to my head ,
her beauty shone as a star might shine
he read a burial service there ,
puffed , puffed and moved away , out on the track ,
rightly we heeded not : it was not true .
bothe schyld and spere than~ ,
what vague , delicious dreams ,
and have sweet life in different degrees ,
sways huge oceanus from pole to pole :
let 's sing our sang .
the saddle - horse is failing ,
awa ye squatter'd , like a drake ,
but pray who is that beauty of very great size ,
" will yer tell me how ? " " yes , mam ! "
and , in the dim and perfumed mist ,
but sickening of a vague disease ,
she seems to me , go where she will ,
thou shakest in thy fear :   there yet is time :
or gild his life with lights that shine in vain ,
then , far away , a lonely note of the horn .
books writ on occult and
you would n't believe jimmie was different ...
foresaw that curve -- despair ,
and o'er his head flew jealousies and cares ,
they 'll beat the school
of tears shall beat thy light out
caught from old england 's fine time - hallowed drink ,
towards the place from whence the larum rings ,
et iacet exstincto laurus adusta foco ;
beneath the birchen bowers--
but , more a man proceeds , less evil grows .
the years came , and the years went ,
divined in thee the questing foot that never
their eyes forgot their tears ;
sing their evadne ; and still more for thee
for that he hath not quite dejected me ;
our voices we 'll raise ,
a garden oratory cool and fair
there still to read true , pure divinity .
of thunder ; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which he
as full of woes as any :
a sole exoriente supra maeoti ' paludes
the touch of one born blind !
yollotl , iv , 6 . heart , mind , center .
likeness of such words , as words are powerless to praise . any
and it means , sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones ,
and here my brethren , who their steps refrain'd
and cruel slaughter made
the love - son of the second birth foretold
flag of freedom and union , wave !
a pharaoh , but to dull the cheek and eye
so must your safe return be bought again ,
to play life 's game with head erect ;
they take their leave .   marphisa , who as well
boot , top , dasher , from tough old hide
and the blackbird sings on the dancing spray
who , when his appetite is low ,
with such ambrosial perfume as is born .
a wretche vnauysed , and a catyf blynde .
and tok his wommannysshe chiere ,
  _ i.e. _ , retirement from office .
like his own lightning , over mountains high ,
secretum iter et fallentis semita vitae(143 ) ,
the crocus burns , and the narcissus fair
that him , and me , and my poor family ,
and from her urn the gentle naiad poured
and vanished,--we who are about to die
their neighbourhood and touch impure .
that the mount of transfiguration still
and troy ’s black sands must drink our blood alike :
scarce seem'd a vision -- i would ne'er have striven
their rosy fleece of fire bestow .
fudêre monstrum : rumpite , rumpite
as when , from sun or nightly planet shed ,
into twinkling stars around him ;
a likely impossibility is always preferable to an unconvincing
' to all an equal lot heaven 's bounty gave :
i set her on my pacing steed ,
this talk about her home is half and half ,
heavy , though in their place .   o fleeting joys
showed him in all that throng
_ " eyes have i , good sir , " she said.--
per l'amor d'un trovatore !
ye pile your own full board .
but ogier went on foot to die ,
where bleak suns glare ,
and not a breath is stirring
low lies the head , by death 's cold arms
in tears and sighs unto the woods and wilds ;
and nae leave 's speer'd o ' me .
_ by that ( time ) was all on a heap , hurling fast , _
the mountains grew so high
o gen'rous prince ! my nation , or my name ,
what graces move
and first began to weep ;
but still they consider it somewhat odd
harvard law school , where he took the degree of ll.b .
yet all , if now they first for mortals were ,
to the cares of this world , let us not accord as much
like gold her sunset ray .
so the servant raised his weapon ,
with haloed tapers , warm with prayer ;
of laughing suns and season fair ;
and pleasure , sapping , seemed to fill .
of holy divination in their dreams ,
  " inductio delectat , et est vulgo apta , propter similitudines et
made of plaster ; in the galbes were nests of birds .
on the dry smooth - shaven green ,
missouri is the pride of the nation ,
to rescue thee from my resistless hand . "
that 's aye sae neat and clean ;
maids a - waiting ;
she saw the dreadful accident like one
my mates may rejoice ,
with ten thousand shields and spears .
under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing , and the
what need i of ears and eyes
which next with narrow roof of tiles atop
bitterly when i commanded them to return to the ships , and i was
they both ascend in one bright pyramis ;
to freedom .
who slashed our sleeves like patriots , nor forswore
as on he coasted from the mexic bay
mount his horse , if he has one , and -- follow his nose ;
reach the north kurus ’ land , where rest
if birds should build as early ,
tell 's freedom - beacon lights the swiss ;
or mountain - built with peaceful citadel ,
and they stopped when they came to the grave of wolfe tone .
my good companion , mate ,
unstain'd untainted with immodest wine .
john butt , _ king 's college , university of durham _
hath called me , made me slave and king in one ;
a flush o'erspread the young destroyer 's cheek ,
and hosses both to drive and ride .
" for i have loved thee with a love
when i was taken from the other life .
sprung from the cliff , and sunk beneath the waves .
¡ ay ! levantad los ojos
whispering , said the falcon to his master :
and one , as if commission'd from above ,
“ to rush , and hand to hand this foe engage ,
with a lonely prayer for your sake ,
all the prisoners joining heartily in the chorus , making the
of rebels routed in their lair
and our naked legs a - danglin ' thum the apern o ' the dam .
would a ' the land do this , then i 'll be caution
not to chisel ornaments ,
when i was taken from the other life .
the sober eve , or hail the cheerful dawn ;
by the duke and matilda .   matilda had never
thus cheerfulness , a product underrated ,
it is conceived of the sterre :
and taste that supper sweet .
better will be the ecstasy
to some sweet singer lost , or unrevealed .
not a court ape 's left to confute us ;
for when ye break the cloven earth
in trade -- the which
“ with that complete ? of all the world 's extent
of unreplying matter , so this course
for in the midst , with public honours graced ,
some , when th ' affair was _ blenheim _ 's glorious battle ,
of lustre from the brook , in memorie ,
since you have waned from us ,
permittis , puto , pileata roma .
richly - gilded shining trumpet ,
in heavenly balm , fresh gathered there ;
alack and well a - day !
but in the world of sense we can perceive
mae mair in number will he be .
despair not ! give me lower service ! seek
himself array'd , the golden lash he grasp'd ,
go thou to east , i west .
and the dancers pause for breath ,
heroes arose -- but none like you
where some vast ancient - timbered oak of jove
but brings not out the bustle and the din
heaps of soot upon his shoulders ,
for they had n't a morsel of meat ,
and the flowers of heath all golden ,
safe from the weather !
to joy and peace and charity . the weak
and mourners , to and fro ,
oh , fairer was their hair than gold of goblet ,
and a new altar ,
there was gatherin ' of women , there was hush upon the
would isabel have with her , day and night .
that sorrow in our happy world must be
' pass that way : here the gate is . " --"and may she
eagle - like must seek the blue ,
sin is an act so free , that if we shall
of his surpassing agony , and death ,
and them , thyself from vengeance safe , hast sav'd .
who unto god 's priestess flies :
the mirrored silence of this pool   . . . . . . . . .
a light shone round his head ! "
the guards their morrice - pikes advanced ,
in fancy too across the bay
ah no !   no longer ours ; before thy shrine
al paso que la luna declinaba ,
" all grappling bonds , that knit the heart to god ,
in an old jerkin and patched hose that no man might him mark ;
to write his name , and thine , among the stars ?
but teacheth not aught of the worst and the best .
we know them all , these placid countries ,
and no defect about her could be found ,
nor god nor demon sought their widowed love ;
hymns devout and holy psalms
oh i much should like to know this !
my heart was singing like a happy bird ,
the skipper yawned , put out his tongue ,
of any simple human heart .
thus did they converse , but king apollo said to mercury ,
a smacking kiss salutes his aged cheek ,
the waves are bright with mirrored light as jacinths on
come shyly , with quivering fur , to see
a sword and buckler is our god .
through the catkins downy .
through the song - sweet days of may ;
why suffering flows in endless streams
there to woo a bride in honor ,
when the lips have spoken ,
ripe from the tutor , proud of liberty ,
" if i did think , my answer were to one ,
" so queenly , so honored , so good and so fair ,
he took a small , neat house , just outside of the town ,
has escaped from the bog
riseth the praise of god from hearts in tuneful song .
his people , who defend ? will they not deale
" if i knew , friend , if i knew that my presence
didst thou hope he would in pitty
asleep in moonlight !
and implored good people to pray " of their charytie
and with his arrow sever'd it . upsprang
so doth the mighty ruin cast its spell
stood up the marshal stig before .
to walk together to the kirk ,
yet for a little space it still endured ,
under an oak whose antique root peeps out
it was enough to turn one 's brain
' here sleep , whom neither life nor love ,
we must not stand to gaze too long ,
þat he moght thol on his licam ” --(_ibid . _ fol . 51a . )
to die and mingle in the tumult 's blare .
how good , how just , how kind mine uncle was ;
then he mounts his steed .
why loiter in vain pity ? why not hate
for mercia 's king , great man , hath two princesses !
i saw the fish - boats far away
and think about the books i 've read
down sunk the bell , with a gurgling sound ,
is more in thee than in her dust
and laura 's is the wealth i love ,
so growyth the nomber and so they multyply
they neuer saw peeces so sweete before
and light of foot , and unconfined ,
walie , wawlie , choice , ample , large .
but the bride she had sunk ’ neath the waters high .
but mixed with the mirth , and still looked kind .
and the fury of battle
perchance thy splendid lot be solely this :
when , like pelides , bold beyond controul ,
" oh what a nice and lovely fit !
eld . bro . thyrsis ! whose artful strains have oft delayed
and thou , my mind , aspire to higher things :
because i wear not shylock 's sunday face
they shall stay and starve.--
if their far - spread renown were false or true ,
and , stepping forth to meet the same ,
to two loves more , on this same day ,
bravely have you wrestled with me ,
rock - bound , i bade the victor - knight go by ;
who is , however , too silly in my apprehension for vernon .
and apollodorus say that this was a fox , which was called ‘ the
so the master stooped in his pity , and gave him a pass to go ,
celebration of some _ svetac _ ( saint ) . to the same grouping belong
the truest lover of sinful man
there was a navy went into spain ;
live blest amid the unyielding brave ,
calm my blood that thrills with impending transport ;
but thereby there hangs a soft secret , my friend ,
now that a new edition is appearing ,
separation . early in june they parted , little dreaming that they
she holds her heads from the dreadful gulf , and there she
lassie wi ' the , & c.
spring to the window or the door ,
επ ’ αλλοτ ’ αλλον ως τε με-
and the naiad - like lily of the vale .
quite unsolved , uncomprehended :
but four times art thou blest ,
freedom for you still waits , still , looking backward , stays ,
what care i for the ship , sailor ?
others among the chief might offer now
they mix and melt together !   yon blue hill
unknown among the thousands of those his country weeps ;
over lovers ,
in puddles ; we will pledge this seraphim
labyrithos lay , and rich in honey'd sweets
and love 's warm tide for ever stopped in thee .
vales with grain ;
and evere schal to mannes ere ,
will men , that ask such questions , publish books
i fought an ' danced an ' carried on ,
a yellow lion and a bristly boar . "
more dark than a dead world 's tomb ,
when canada 's ten million strong ,
give us religion that will cope
born of high - souled hope that smiled ,
again i catch the cuckoo 's note
inward , the breast 's translucent fibres plain
a garden of our own ,
these seven were robed like the first band ; but they made not a
i brood .   " they are not i.
and the face of nature mirrors back the unseen face of god .
thou art late , o death ,
silvered the edge of the sea ,
bend ,
_ ah ! qu'elle est belle la marguerite . _
my comrade , she , in the touchwood camp ,
old stings that made them bleed and smart --
on these fair - seeming words how far can i
some prudent gnomes , ' tis said , apprised
came the poisonous contagion ,
to caen now he comes to sleep ,
by angry labour in such terms addressed
to grieve our god no more .
see the forehead of the night
all before my little room ;
that there was pleasure there .
smiteth the heart of man than when a son
ye tine your dam ;
rushed their great canoes of thunder .
and of their , as yet unheard of ,
on all our house ; and thou , incensed above
food for the vulgar merely -- is an art
with dreams and visions , was the first to teach .
a gladness beams o'er earth , and main , and heav'n--
each beast of chase the mountain forest holds .
for both were craftie and unhappie witted ;
but ' twas the work of him who counts the grains of sand .
that beneath thy soil lie sleeping ,
this withering world , which from the first
hear , o self - giver , infinite as good ;
jove hangs the heav'ns , and agitates the deep !
dear men !
by my side lascaro strode ,
" tell me , what 's love ? " said youth once more ,
so ably conducted by owd jimmy wright .
set like a star ,
death 's lectvre and the fvneral of a yovng gentleman
glimmered like the watery moonlight ,
and one seems , by the pain of ascending the height ,
no babes are we in aught that appertains
and is he dead , whose glorious mind
alas ! she fancied to deceive
' if you keep on complaining , ' he swore ,
heart unto heart , where the moonlight is slanted ,
tu miserum torques , tu me mihi dira precari
of the sculptured cherubim ,
there as gentle friends ye smile ,
he sees the two little ones talking together--
and the thrill of thy wild pervading tone !
and round about his hearkening ears confusèd murmur sent ;
when do the reasoning powers decline ?
grey grows the dawn while men - folk sleep ,
doth shriek in madness , and downward dart ,
" from the vale , what music ringing ,
saying , " i vill give half my father 's land
  prickard thinks aristotle misread in this passage . according to
country of tales and songs concerning devils , ghosts , fairies ,
i hear the old refrain
were dashed against his eyes , and roared so fierce ,
i can still feel the spirit that bore us ,
lift up your lyres !   sing on !
where sunlight of the noon is pale ,
appropriation of sound to sense . pope has admirably imitated the
the words , wherein thy ethic page describes
thou smilest ! joy , i see ,
' twere affectation all , and school - taught pride ,
' tis true we ' ve few cowslips or roses ,
nor fame , nor power , nor love , nor leisure ;
the tale revived , the lie so oft o'erthrown ,
whose changing particles unchanged on high ,
and , if men report him right ,
each seems the other , as our fancies will--
when earliest larks first carol free ,
the poet 's clearer eye should see , in all
and dressed the rocky shelves , and paved the painted bay .
puft up in fiendish wise .
the ladye took travailing ,
thou shalt have worship of us evermore
shakes her head , frowning ;
so dust to grave , but souls find place in heaven .
poore clearks & sextons , and some thriftlesse heires ,
have i seen in different nations ,
" he 's up the stair wi his bonny bride ,
for he kenned the themes that pleased her best ;
nay , postumus , my comrade , the years have hurried on ;
and the church - possessing town , rujitza .
what thy commanding soul shall put it to ;
to my fair fancying ,
downward . " is it so wonderful , " she said ,
young and tall and very handsome ,
you only i hear -- yet the star holds me ( but will soon depart ) ,
for lack of gossip .   so do lonely men
' set me fine spanish tables in the hall ;
with me , along that strip of broadway strewn
astonisht : none among the choice and prime
through the silent - roaring ocean
for the lord is patient with his slow scholar ;
wall by which the sacred stairways are separated according to the
then smoke from hamlets round about
who with a smile each tear would hide .
coughed and chattered from the oak - tree ,
then the flesh to flesh she fitted ,
in bad humor , full of anger ,
what mould of man he was .
and once more sleep weighed down his eyelids weak .
welcome to mine eye the sight
derided and befogged by fools ;
like no great eagle do i soar ,
had caught a childish attitude from theirs ,
en las altivas cumbres permanece
scourge ; being but a lifting up , as it were , into a greater
one morning in the spring .
is woman to hope and to fear ;
and wondered more and more to see
that can sing both high and low :
the plowman homeward plods his weary way ,
and the bay was white with silent light ,
until at last
when laid in his chest ;
sprinkled with his atoning blood
three hundred years hied ; church - restorers came ,
nor more i shrink appall'd , afraid ;
the spell of rest lasted some two months , and then the legion
with invitations " as whitman would say .   i have never been
at the trapeze swingin ' there ,
that walks beneath their light ,
to gaze on nature , who doth never pall
' twixt which some sparkling berry slips ,
some maiden verging onto twenty - eight--
keeping disreputable company .
wakes every lotus with his light .
singin ' , singin ' , " home , sweet home ! "
till all the earth of peace shall sing .
the heaving bosom , and each quivering limb !
and bends the cypress , shuddering , to his fold ,
wholly to bearing children , just to find
till her hand was caught in a strait
bought a cape , against the cold .
its daring colours bravely flinging forth
the dearest tramp afloat .
mal i gallwyf orau ,
though few thy troops who conanour sustain ,
to which the suitor 's gold was wo nt to
no fairer maid all thessaly contain'd ,
_ still she remembers _ , though she loves me now .
sumantra , lakshmaṇ gave assent ,
had sought that refuge in his hour of dread .
after mete , as i you teaesaes ,
or find some other way to generate
he left his ianisaries in a trance ,
he shall hear me singing strongly , till he die ,
looking on roofs , as poets look on lilies ,
the following poems are used by permission of , and by special
lady - bird , lady - bird
gods , fauns , and bards of heavenly race ,
' tis folly to be wise . '
if our sky with no iris be glory - bedecked ?
where swells and falls
red flashed his eyes with angry glow :
too much of heidsieck ( extra dry ) ,
said , " on christmas eve , ' neath this mistletoe bough ,
_ new year 's day -- casa de bottin _
i ween , so base a treason knight ne'er will do again ,
a river just below ,
ecce avortit : nisam laevo in femine habet laevam manum .
and all thy glory loves to tell
what ! you go take the vows , my dear !
and jealous dames disdainful gazed ,
a bitter symbol of that strife
and thou thy love - longing wilt quickly forego . ”
feet as they rushed towards each other , and two champions , by far
o woman , what does it avail thee to dispute whether he is beyond
out of hamelin town in brunswick land ,
mother , i can not mind my wheel ;
i stayed the sun at noon to tell
with slow still touch on each decaying grace ;
is for this cause assign'd us , that our vows
he goes to guard the saviour 's grave;--
but the war is done between us ,
what from our master ’s interest thus we draw ,
he fourscore thousand of his nubian power ,
new york as well as i , cafes and shops ;
and bombs , shells , and crackers , that crashed through the trees ,
come ever true , come ever near ,
and for a year or two had been quite blind .
for the sweetest hours are the ones that bring
the thick snow has covered them quite .
there 's nothing like the food of fiction !
of the argonauts sung to by sirens ,
and elfinhart moved closer to her knees
" let 's ride along the river . " so they rode ,
" we welcome with almost as much surprise as satisfaction the
as hath not oft occurr'd ; the overthrow
she comes a - chirping far and wide ,
at times he beats his heaving breast
your own in front of them , though yours are much worse than mine
whose foot ( ye gods ! ) though cloven , must be kiss'd ,
with his huge sea - castles heaving upon the weather bow .
  note vii .
has found his upward way , i answer thee ,
she burn'd out love , as soon as straw outburneth ;
  this appeared first as the regular new year 's sheet of the
a chieftain to the highlands bound
whatever is , is right .
swooped again the furious eagle ,
but he des play , sof ' en sweet ,
without one dash of usher or of priest :
and shows his god to human eyes
" i 'm sent to warn the neighbors .   he is n't a mile behind ;
of the christ - child nestling amid the green
wrought in my bosom , i the scatter'd leaves
standing with my arm around her ;
and by the poor man greatly feared ;
there with your little lunch - box in your lap ;
i hear no more the wind athwart
and base it deep as devils grope :
they have no wings , they could not fly ,
as are the roots of earth and base of all ;
he bade them to his great barn repair ,
the universal order served ,
slaves come and lift from the tresses they loosen ,
from the foul kitchen to the parlor rise ,
ay , and while you slept , a baby , over all the english lands
just before she had her doom .
why then , be a man and stand back from the strife ,
and all my toil is fashioned
what shall i say ? what can i do ?
" mr . cawein 's landscape is not the sea , nor the desert , nor the
an titana domas ? an pastoralia lunam
on their shoulders for morsels of meat !
and all the world
that falls below
and bid him ' neath thy mastery learn in battle to be bold ,
wake you early from your slumber .
great jove , awaking , shook the blest abodes
when that the two assemblages shall part ;
only the black tide weltering , only the hissing snow ;
nor second he , that rode sublime
this is ahasuerus ' sovereign will
after long wand'rings , would not pant to see
some plant without apparent seed be found
for lads from far away .
and failure is its fashion ; but still worse
lo ! this is my beloved son !   hear him !
zeus rent the deep - bosomed earth
" ch'hanno perduto il ben del intelletto "
sank on his knees the king ; and humbly veil'd
ah me ! the blooming pride of may ,
with scarlet berries gemm'd , the fell - fare 's food .
hares couch , and rabbits burrow ,
a bird of prey , with talons reeking ,
so silent and shy ?
cool autumn winds , pale dew - kissed flowers ,
studying that and that alone , thou learnest
you mind that he do n't clout you off --
shaped and fashioned it with figures ;
sea mich he thowt he were to bleame
with thy father in the northland ,
parchment . his whole collected poems would thus be more easily
he had no beard , but long white hair .
but never to his prayer consent ;
country .
irresistibly
thine own pains never easing ,
raked up all the water - flowers ,
recess , and onely consolation left
though rain , than is pleasant oft makes us much wetter . "
thus scotlands greatest poets met ,
bearing some load along in the dusk to the dunghill .
to whom , of all his friends esteemed most true ,
tortaque remigio spumis incanduit unda ,
through him ten thousand franks lie slain
and the grim navies watch along the seas ;
his ear was growing dull in death
" maugre the doom of heaven ,
the saft springs o ' pleasure had lang , lang been seal'd ;
playwright can not improve upon the eighteenth century , with his
and share a master 's bed . for thee , begone !
stalk , the party in question will come to the marriage - bed
did some rich man tyrannically use you ?
ossa uirum lacerosque prius superastitit artus ,
like the bride of night in winter ,
where ' mid the moonlit mists they strain
fragments of cloth of silver gleamed and danced
heed not the hoarse sea 's doleful moan ,
a different kind of craft on a taut bow - line,--
then i climbed a. lofty mountain ,
whereon men sung in flushed lyæus ' praise
and how the lark , to drown the nightingale ,
really it 's a dreadful case .
i never now poor puss will beat ,
direct we journey'd : when i felt a weight
dearly i lov'd thee as my first - born child ,
for fear lest he would tell .
her , san sisto names , and her , foligno ,
and the good knights were not slow to thank her .
before he speaks ,
before her knife that came ;
pictures strange fancies which no tongue can tell .
and look in vain . _
the rose , the violet , one day
-- bradamant 's mother she -- with armelline ,
piled in the lists the presents they behold ,
peculiar , let me be with him compared ;
advancing towards him , nor unseated by
through the chilling dampness of the misty weather ,
so when a lion shakes his dreadful mane ,
blew two months and blew unceasing ,
weep in the public roads alone .
ah , weel may young jamie gang dowie and cheerless ,
for the wrath is now begun .
for every turkey gets the axe ,
happiness do i enslave myself to such a state , since in it
was by his orders put to death .   giacopo , was overtaken by the
you beheld me with disdain ,
scoenus , and scolus , and the highland range
and , as she bade , prepared in haste a couch
beneath the mossy cave ;
some gooseberry - pie for me , oh ! "
whilst lazy puss with mealy mouse
that might have sat beside me here .
the bells , the jesses , the bright scarlet hood ,
sing blythe on every bough ,
and fled , nor durst his brother 's corpse defend .
first from the frighted court the yell began ;
he has got a bad face , and a shocking bad hat ,
what gorgeous beauty springs !
your life shall go to battle with his bow ,
cynneddvau clodvorion a rhadvorion . ”   ( triad , 26 , third series . )
once again he rose a conqueror ,
and raised her hand as though it held a cup ,
" some folks , again , " he said , " quite overlook
" her perfect mouth so liked a carved kiss ? "
but when thou com'st , i blot the airy scroll ,
" examining all the curiosities of the countries they visited , and
of wiser and of manlier mind than e'er ,
nala _ spake _ .
forsaking in thy lofty scorn
_ so many times over comes summer again _ ,
jackets may do to ride or race ,
yet love me -- wilt thou ?   open thy heart wide ,
what lord st . leger next will be
by simple folks and tender - hearted ,
shakes the great universe !
till he shall have set her back in hell , there whence envy first
and wicked men were sinning
which did n't seem to hit .
for she canna thole to let her deuks an ' hens awa'--
but four young oysters hurried up ,
in body still alive upon the earth .
in whirling circles , but the earth was swept
" with bone well carved he went away ,
to the endless stream of mana ,
the gods of the crowbar and shovel ;
on one side there is light .
and knows not what she should , or will ;
this is the lonely season of the year ,
now looks she back , with pains untold ,
smile , that one smile 's full restitution .
i climbed the stair in antwerp church ,
but still that noblest bird sustained
wor to be dealt half - yearly
a lily she among the daisies ;
without thy falcon stuffed with cloves and spice ?
to give it my loving friends to keep !
place their own kin , and thrust the torch beneath
an ' then i sprints like mad to get the nurse .
delight and liberty , the simple creed
_ maria pur quando vuol , non è bisogna mutar ni faccia ni voce per
and held his hondes up , and sat on knowe ,
hard task , cries bibulus , and reason weak ,
by the bridge there was a house .
and an evening pass
while the ploughman , near at hand ,
sweet was the hour , tho ' dearly won ,
i beg you won't--
' he 's anxious over - much -- for so they say .
her in his heart and loved her , / from all his gloom was freed ,
i see history preparing the statue and niche ;
grown pitiful and come to build love 's shrine
as coarse threads and fine together
lord ! no man careth for my soul .
and comes at times to help with willing hands .
her grey headed elders may weep in despair ;
bequeathed by noble fathers , should thy strength
hark ! the storm petrel shrieks !
save by thy death .   then weigh thou not the shame
" at an iron - barred turret , a lady fair
did make his coat and her own dress ;
the doubtful hazard of uncertain fight .
i 'd smile on ye sweet as the angels do,--
wept and trailed her tresses gray
the lamp hummed :
on alpine mountains high the magic edelweis ;
late having deck'd with beauty 's rose his tomb ,
vindictive looked the scowling firmament ,
the dipping butterflies
" ah , death ! to know , " she moans ,
virtute experiamur . et hoc simul accipe dictum :
must bend to the power that at every door knocks ,
then come o'er the sea ,
or some saintly personage equally gracious ,
ses dix - huit ans , helas , et son doux reve !
so noble nature can well end the work she hath begun ,
nor check our speed , impatient of delay . "
_ alexiad _ , a history of her father 's reign . ]
my expertise . "
had one white hour of life brim full ;
and the hearts that fondly clasped it ,
ah , the longing ceasing never
offered hecatombs of bulls and goats without blemish on the
and souls are restless , plagued , impatient things ,
introduction by george robert guffey . 332 pages .
longships of the northmen , galleons of spain ,
vnto his griefes i may impose an end ;
sophia callebas prius .
of the enchanter , who has ordered so ,
lord of the street , a monarch in his way .
house of the prince , and straightway he went in and sat
and slave as i was my triumph fell .
the which myselfe against myselfe doe make ,
of the deprav'd italian land , which lies
gave forth " so sweetly and so well , "
so be my life -- a thing felt but not noticed,--
and i beheld in a sequestered place
to perfect by his death thy praise !
mosq .   yes ; and they are still in the neighborhood .
the steel cries out , but does not break outright ;
give to me the life i love ,
those monarchs , proud of pillaged spoils ,
long way off , where he washed him in the river , anointed him with
the silence into nets , and tenanters
made valid , through vicarious ordinance ,
what herd like russell tell'd his tale ,
the flower from its stem the rude whirlwind may sever ,
divine , dear , terrible , familiar ...
to infant babbling . ]
with fleeting life depart ;
' why that i can not tell , ' said he ,
alone ulysses drew the vital air ,
bowndyn in a bond ,
and often looked worse than before .
of scarlet cloth ! papa cried " pish ! "
with other promises and other vaunts
the old man saw they not , e'en as before ;
for memory , dwelling
breathed his sighs o'er all the landscape ,
as distant , as the disagreement is
and weeping of the weary pleiads seven ,
dim forests of orkadale .
xxix     i think of thee!--my thoughts do twine and bud
and fellowship in woe doth woe assuage ,
and the heart of eve beats lax i ' the end
whereby thou hadst the power of doing it .
this good yuletide .
like a sleepless mourner grieves ,
the best luck o ' the day ! "
and god 's peace dwelt in the mingled chords
a real offset of our ancient tree ,
not tied unto the world with care
then all the works of god with close embrace
be not more stubborn than the rest have been ,
as those , when thou shalt call me by my name--
lo ! the swiss of the church from perugia come ;
nor murm'ring wake , nor seem they quite asleep ,
what , nigh the journey 's end shall i abide ,
he asked if i would sell my christmas trees ;
of the autumn 's bacchic fire .
the thought o ' mary morison .
and the young heavens , forgetful after rain ;
for thy friend a feast ?
and bud and increase throughout life , until
make my horn parley from their foreheads hoar :
and me from horror to half - swooning safety .
iesum ciamus vocibus
son of antenor , for heaven counselled his destruction ; it struck
eyes are all too large and bright--
who first provok'd or gave th ' assault ;
ah , flow'ry days how vanishing !
the eighth circle -- seventh bolgia continued -- cacus -- agnello
white - footed astrid,--ah , but she is beautiful!--
from the springs arise in beauty ,
may make you laugh on t ' other side .
to see her sittin on her arse
uttered in front of us amid the weeping
that the mean estate is best ;
" why greedily thus bendest more on me ,
of fleeting summer days .
no flower of virtue near it lives :
the woodland rings with laugh and shout ,
verily within those drear
how will our fathers rise up in a rage ,
were breathed in song to earth and sky .
no more the glancing sunbeams burn
and made himself the god .
my name -- for that you fear ?
from their own master 's chariot , foam'd to fly .
the tyrant , and confound his cruelty .
the rains are fallin ' --
are doubly dear .
bore the name of untamoinen ,
and the heart freezes to repose .
and the blue - tinged mountains far and farther ,
and drives a chariot , like a god made wroth ,
the hairy strength of great pylaemenes
was richer than these diamonds -- hers not mine--
and roll adown a channel large
under your marching feet .
_ characters _ : a noble lady , who is an assassin .
and boldly venture to whatever place
and drop the bread and milk about ;
" in neptune 's bosom plac'd alone .
phor ' kys -- the harbor where the phæacians landed odysseus on his
her children 's little coats and things , her boots and her hose ,
she cried : " release me , graham lee ;
from sin 's destructive power ,
the melancholious , lazy croon
full many a noble heart , ( and such remain
the ferste of hem men erthe calle ,
then how happy would we rove , bonnie peggy , o !
qui apud gallos annie proximis legationem obierunt
the sun 's on its breast , love ,
i bid you fight the cause of quog ,
but e'er i reach'd the great encampment 's bound
from low desires , from restlessness and sin ,
yon dark - brow'd cape of monstrous size became ,
so let alone this matter ; ' twere better so for all . "
all the music , " you say , " of god ! "
on the man that laid him low ;
from the fatal stream and whirlpool ,
the murmured hum of learning--
that now en'e trembles at the name of warre ,
in dungeons vile they pass'd the day ,
of lovers,--past counting at least !
does day close his eyes ?
and that this rash irreverent touch
the sweet success that follows pain .
which shows thy light , o pure religion ! shed ,
that i ne can imaginen a wey
y mata con el cuerpo el alma mía ,
ipsum , versiculos nihil necesse est .
with trusty agents , as beseems ,
advancing to the front , the hero stands ,
that ever wrought a lover 's doom .
where the sun 's light shone silvered and leaf - split ;
and was below , and saw one who was looking
and now , the bosom of the deep invites ,
came the hunters with their load .
i niver can call her my wife
the way we have loved you , young , young land !
this drucken bout should be my last .
" hark ! the swelling bugle sings ,
in flowing words that holy man :
to keep the victory gained .
the doors , the wind , the glove that did delay him ,
so here , my dear nanny , in haste i must leave 'em ,
for ample stores i have of gold , and brass ,
who is this person of the bitter vision . "
and the dead march moaning at their head :
on which the eye delights to rest ,
crowning with mercy freedom 's greatest strife .
with the common signet of sorrow ,
before the thousands of the court ,
and , as a mirror , one reflects the other .
take its meaning to heart :
miew , miew , miew , miew .
to valborg he his snowy hand
whom ráhu hates,(396 ) grows faint and dim ,
you walked by the riverside path with the full pitcher upon your
and we heard the calling , calling ,
not kill , the clip i give him , could n't do . '
while millions shuddered at your dreadful fall ;
" o my son ! o guneshwa ! " cried the old woman , flinging her arms
i should be dead , let me no longer live ,
from may till october , the apples shone gay ;
him of the revenues whichhe had carefully husbanded , and his
song , " earl march looked on
o gin they live not royallie !
_ but lo ! ye are little things !
line 23 . our text misspells ' ding . '
my bed the ground that hardest i may fynd ;
from this he drew fresh appetite for sway ,
they brake them everichone .
beat on the nursery window pane:--
be grafted alien on a broken stalk ,
with heartfelt tears , that now are read no more ;
soft singing at midnight through heaven 's high blue
and mists are carved away , --
the law protects you . go your gentle way :
the artillery were pounding at the weak place in the wall ;
and anchor in the sun ?
a silent tarn below ;
earth had fairer was a madness .
his high pleasure was it / they unto her should go .
" could bear the long , the cheerless night
and o'er that meadow of the cup
the little man then spoke ,
of yearning love , would any rise
yet will not give me leave to die ?
and of the public faith become a living part .
but fancy broods on brighter scenes ,
surpasses my descriving :
speak , and my pow'r shall add this office more :
of midnight march , and hurried meeting here ,
the pathway for his own ;
they cry unto the night their battle - name :
many women live to censure ,
paris he seeks , impatient to destroy ,
man and his maker -- but of things allowed ,
nathless , that cry ! with huddled faces hid
and is gone again next minute !
though sweet , the silver showers between ,
drifting away for a loaf and play ,
and on the night - air , wild and clear ,
who recks in what ruin they fold their wet wings ?
and the family name , tree - frog .
then -- at midnight -- at each hour ,
such make his destiny !
twice forty times return ;
every seed to some end according as the stars are its companions ,
chloris , chloris all the theme ,
and so you 'll write to mcandrews , he 's chief of the maori line ;
of power , dominion , glory , wealth , and state ;
yet , since at heart we treasure
the humble home to memory dear ,
of the state of the crops , for of him land they rent ,
in order that to earth thou news mayst bring
with his weight of gold .
and not a leaf shall withered be
whether of words or weapons , we shall be
live for fame , side by side with agnolo !
" another azo rules verona 's town ,
" you come between me and my dead !
fact or fiction , life or play--
walk in the groves , and thou shalt find
for one hushed voice , one empty chair ,
who bringest forth no saying yet so dark
of its own hurt , but madala
is meet , my love , for thee !
i will not give her up ; and let who will
i must n't resk ice - cuttin ' . "
why should i uneasy live ?
the wind blows cold,--'tis growing late ;
he drove ashore in a small bark so swift
off and about ,
where the sun the wild juice of the cluster refines ,
away , i 've heard all that before ,
now o'er the level valley sweep ,
qua sata de caelo prospicit arua ceres ,
in short , whoever you may be ,
saw you no sign on the wide milky way ?
" an oath he had to swear him , / he 'd serve him as his slave ;
" i can not see what pleasures
nor scathed he , nor let scathe , that martial maid ,
not one knows .
just such a mood , and this they chanced to see ;
within the postern stood argantes stout
a note sent up from kent to show me ,
" if i may yet be gone ! "
the strong man fights but the sick man dies .
men love not women as in olden time .
lucid in the moon , raise lilies to the skyfields ,
as hope from yesterday .
perhaps the bud lost from the loaded tree
that we may return to the ships covered with glory after having
" like stone from sling , " quoth gawaine , " i was shot
there was a pause before the answer came ,
in sudden light they shone and heavenly harmony .
to - morrow , comrade , we
and the meaning of the symbol ,
when ye sail with admiral death .
a foe if subdu'd will most gladly resign ,
are you not budded yet ?
hamilton , if he rides you down , remember
every day is longer
the blackbird in the apple calling ,
having that within her womb that had left her ill content ;
but he must go by fort bukloh to his own place to fare ,
a freissh , a fre , a frendly man
and beautiful .   whether an orphan child only , or
natural overgrowths they lop ,
that sight
now a black shadow gliding farther on ,
through gothic helm and brain it passed ;
and the whirring sail goes round ,
of boreas and of zephyrus the loud ,
if virtue fail her counsel sage ,
therefore , child of mortality , love thou the merciful father ;
and spreads her sheets o ' daisies white
but since i 've been a - sojerin '
evade him as we will .
such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces . '
breathless during the recital .
a locket , frosted over with seed pearls ,
here every eve thou stretchest out
of all the train the mightiest and the best .
" behold ! behold , the palace of his pride !
but should you want a hearty meal ,
no love hath she , no understanding friend ;
was never , arms on armour clashing bray'd
the years that burn and break ,
groaned " mother !   mother ! " like a child ,
but ere the key - stane she could make ,
the shallows roar ;
to build these leafy pillars fair .
naught as a fable merely she supplies--
the sin still blithe on earth that sent them there .
for sure he deemed that heaven had sent
of violence echo through the vault of heav'n .
will send the young gentlemen out in the cold .
those not the days of ' wait and see . '
to do all kinds of service / his willing pledge he gave"--
hoping his conquest should enlarge their trade ,
" yet had he many a restless dream ;
as to versification , lanier uses almost all the types of verse
of the wet winds blew never , neither did the bright sun
their nest was in the leafy bush ,
so glide ye streams in hollow channels pent ,
but gen'ral forms of _ politesse _ ,
and the bones all mixed together
a light pierced , more resplendent than the day .
e'en all religious courses to be rich
they do not fear that skill can master it .
but here 's a yankee , if you please ,
but when he turned him to the glade ,
has you ever hearn tell about sitch a thing
cruzo el mundo , sin pensar
that which shall not be seen of mortal eye
i think he fashioned from his opposite
her life was interfused with light ,
turn'd out the last whig ministry ,
is grown so dainty , good beginnings last not
that fallinge of the thinges temporel
you hold a most distinguished place--
is seen , is past , and three hours later
and some in dreams assured were
dishonour’d relics of diana ’s war :
so shall i meet this prince of mine ,
then cried , " it does not me , in truth , confound ,
it is true that old peter kept quite in the rear ,
" who was that one , from whom a luckless parting
a way there is : mortals have on it sped ;
_ hans _ [ _ casting himself at the _ prince 's _ feet with a shout of
unsold . " and when we put his poem into english , we are careless
and turns to write . . .   the clock , behind ticks softly .
thus to the dreary mountain - top
first , hale her safe aground , then , hiding all
' ( and , though i say it , i was much like jane , )
two knights to find the prince are sent in haste ,
so rashly speak ? while the high - stepping steeds
on the spot where he lay sprawling ,
so shall i feel my prize secure .
she prepared medicaments the choicest ;
strictest performance of professional duties . among the numerous
' twixt him and the poor , woolly creature
you hitch him up a time er two
for that the surface gives no hints ,
man for the sword and for the needle she :
while some , like flowers mid autumn 's snow ,
and many fawning rhymers who
vitaliano on my left shall sit .
all our strife of words rebuking
a dozen men sat on his corpse ,
o love ! how potent hast thou been to teach
a monstrous wish , unborn till virtue dies .
" in strange disordered crowd ,
such , and so thick , the shiv'ring army stands ,
lo ! euen i{n } myddeȝ my breste hit stode ;
faint - heart ! "
received her praise , and the rude tribes who dwell
not that , for guerdon of his glorious labour ,
must needs impaire and wearie human sense :
most blameless is he , centered in the sphere
a second time did matthew stop ,
what word , do you ask ?   every word ! would you not ,
him shelter from rain :
dome builders from the north , from samarkand ;
why art thou , then , with cup in hand ,
so powerfully on every soul
the sorrow of the passing faces .
go out of thought and reckoning . here 's the issue ;
all hope of life , conducted to my arms
and where my country 's flag is flowing ,
in safety lead them , where the other crag
such wild and fairy contrast made
lazarus after he has been raised from the dead .   well versed in
proud gordon can not bear the thoughts
when i kidded meself a treat ,
we little children are busy ;
take back your envious bribes , and let me go
the balanc't calm of high olympian state ?
the perfect one of man and wife ;
and let my ear your music catch ,
lady , i loved you all last year ,
' but when the wintry frosts begin ,
from abram 's lips that he and she must part ,
country odysseus went on till he reached the land of the
is often loath to realize that all is for the best ;
at my manger richly furnished ,
and he 'll square out his jaw and think of his maw
preserving birds the capital whose voice
proud peacocks , and a hundred mae ,
crowded around bishop hatto 's door ;
y la calma en el placer :
to the sweeter mead of kalew .
very strong yourself and never get worn out ; you seem to be made
life , force , and beauty must to all impart ,
it shō ' mus ' be de kingdom come .
save him , o goddess !
why did she ditch me ? so i thought about it ,
ah'v cause te ivver bless the day ,
thou mightest , like the lost gulnare , prove,--
where he might form his fragrant bowers ,
waving like a hand that beckons ,
and often turns again his dreadful horn
with a sphinx - like shadowy smile ,
his hand on hers , nor said
to keek ahint her ; -
fear not for me -- i've steeled my mind
he watches those who love to drink ,
but answer none a single pagan gave ,
the vulgar results of all poor human love :
sign'd molly , with no other name !
and then , not knowing what to doe ,
affords no ground to affirm
no enemy
but not in silence pass calypso 's isles .
before a blackness -- throned ' mid semblances
our grandmother 's ancient dower .
for the " spots " on the sun are all occupied
moving unto the words their little flames .
its victim to this dreary cell !
canto xliii . the army of the north .
and her lost sons forget from whence they came .
sing , lal de dal , & c.
long , and thin , and gray were the locks that shaded his temples ;
ther myhte hem nothing desobeie ,
down fell she as if dead !
from light whose every glimpse was agony !
or mix in rites that heaven regards with pain ?
oh ! we 're going on a long job now .
might drop a few facts that would interest you
but nought our faith can move ,
to change olympus , & c. ]
so certain , so simple it seems !
where the grey seas glitter and the sharp tides shift
the daintiest damsels ever seen ,
this is time to break with slumber ,
here snakes and adders are descried ,
soon you 'll live without me ....
then sudden check'd her palfrey ( the bit he answer'd well )
that diomedes refus'd his aid in war ,
by one consuming flame : it doth immerse
use well your time , so rapidly it flies ;
whose waves at night like wildfire run--
and we ourselves shall go ;
poring on wordsworth 's poems -- all at once
came two and thirty princes to that high festal tide .
leaving the sport of presidents and kings ,
its success he admits to be secured by the false opinions then
that not alone what to your sense is due
over the burning marle , not like those steps
or , when the sombre weeds i don ,
cloaks but a dummy throne , a mask of life ;
the darnell'd garden of unheedful death ,
if my owd man were livin ' ,
a salt marsh stumbling after , rank and green ,
prefers to wallow there and not get out ,
to my honest old friend in his jacket ;
or any scandal that 's beginnin ' .
unrestrained and unbounded through the rich pastures . the
whisper to the shore .
  washington had written to gage , remonstrating against the cruel
thy spacious tent , fan thy prodigious heat ;
lack any pleasure which a boy can know .
tenth shall take the town . ' this was what he said , and now it is
man frowns -- and only nature smiles .
sues ever to be slave in vaine ,
gerene , and with him there came ninety ships .
the hermit 's servant hasted to the door :
when the sun is high ,
and strange feet standing where the loved had stood ,
be the phantoms unpursued ,
what lips my lips have kissed , and where , and why ,
now soon shall rávaṇ rue his theft ,
the present year has both of us blessed ,
from the scene of his disaster ,
rejects mankind , is by some sylph embraced :
off - hand like -- just as i -
conquers mortality .
and tumbled in a hole a shell had scooped
requite you very handsomely if he could see menelaus mount his
“ i sung the giants , in a strain sublime ,
mair neebours , comin ' saft an ' slaw
e'er having seen him , " now behold ! " he said ,
for it was a fearful blizzard ,
whom that judas of the knights ,
sat simply chatting in a rustic row ;
with the day 's illustrious sight--
" all the hosts of kalevala
and if the new day does not give us work
and they must take the whole or none .
be kind ! since now the high god 's heart is turned away from me ;
to gain a kiss at dawn !
aye when he cast his wet pit - breeks ,
unto my daughter shall i / of gold and silver give
songs and silences unite ,
that any life a man can find
before the wrangling and the shrill delight
  93 . = cairn= ; pile of stones .
the groom 's story
‘ that i may reward him for his pain . ’
which puzzles us to know what fortune means .
bands scattered of the giants lurk ,
right fear't that night .
make way then for us warriors , for so it seems me right .
who , like a hill in bulk and length ,
began to clothe his wit in state and pride ,
that fear no spite of wind or tide !
leaning i listen'd yet with heedful ear ,
for all my pains , poor man , for all my pains ,
stand with terror of ice and snow ,
looked on her , fiercely questioning :
of an illyrian apple bough .
more happy love ! more happy , happy love !
to mow the aureate blossoms from his soul .
over whose heads they roar , and seem to point ,
chills best and bravest blood ,
thy syntax conjures forth a morn
from me his languishments and fears ,
now wad ye sing this double fight ,
with the too proud temper ruling that had parted us before ,
the world 's light shines : shine as it will ,
i can not repeat a thousandth part
" what lovely wench is that there here ? "
' tis true , nor winter stays thy growth ,
prouentuque oneret sulcos atque horrea uincat .
and the wild horn , whose voice the woodland fills ,
and naught but noble bearing / in my high mistress ' kin .
one note in those vast melodies
and from god 's hand falls back upon the earth ,
like th ' curls upon his head ,
' e led me like a child .
permitted face to face to be ;
that with uncommon glow each seraph burns .
the tutor              _ frontispiece _
" will you old this baby , please , vilst i step and see ? "
" wilt thou i touch him on the hip ? "   to whom
accommodated to his own fancy many sacred images in the
weeping and laughing in its wayward moods ,
the genius strategic of cæsar or hannibal--
pierced by an archer ; while his blood is warm
live o'er again that happy hour ,
must shun the bad , aye , and suspect the best .
flushing like the dogwood crimson in october ;
since he sees nothing clear ,
mosse to dry vp his teares , those liquid pearles :
had fall'n into her father 's grave , "
like him who framed the worlds of yore ,
no voice or hideous hum
we made our joys ,
up from the cold sea caves
fig - tree , till they came to two fair springs which feed the river
i for my sire and mother feel
first printed in ' the public ledger ' , may 13 , 1761 .
broke the young cones from the fir - tree ,
and keep me safe and well .
fronting fortune with a smile . _
an ' whar shall we shelter frae its storms when they blaw ,
the tea - pot of her sires !
the lambent gleam which broke into the cell
one natural verse recapture -- then be still .
now boys and laughing girls pluck violets
there by his stately consort sat gunther well appaid ,
and watched the sunset gathering ,
of the hanging tufts of the elder blossoms ,
as long hath been the custom / at high festivity
if she , with those soft eyes in tears ,
to grey - eyed pallas crowns of olive - leaves !
such breadth ulysses to his raft assign'd .
descend ; " the bard began all pale of look :
and weep o'er a ribbon or glove ?
brings peace and enjoyment to some ,
gave her more grace , and so she loved him more ,
' death is never an ending , death is a change ;
with light for heaven and earth , when jove dispatch'd
delinquent . and perchance my narration , dark as themis and the
could i but know my lord was there ,
of paradise ; and one in that array ,
by her lean and hanging teat .
goes onward , rejoicing , through sunshine and shower ;
so man departs to heaven or hell ,
with a tingle , tangle titmouse ,
to god 's behest .
than did the prima donna and the tenor .
her fair youth unwillingly gave .
with keen reproach , with pleading kind ,
let us pause and try , ere we pass them by ,
changed color as texas ' vast reaches i struck .
( to one it is ten years of years :
in laughter and hay forever .
quintiliae , quantum gaudet amore tuo .
his tongue still thirsts to lick the rain ,
nor fears the rain , nor moth , nor mould :
ah me ! an antient oracle i feel
and rustling branches meet ,
he never caused disquiet
a thrill of ghosts went by me now and then ,
ere the night cometh and she may not work .
thou might'st have had as fair a woman ,
how is it , then ? my hand 's already lame :
with grizzled beards at forty - five ,
alternate workers with the bodies of men
that no hors miet him lede ,
and while jar on jar she 's pilin '
a light which , dying never ,
a baby 's weight , and fairy sprites
and beautiful the bare boughs
called to his side , his brothers wept to trace
each host now joins , and each a god inspires ,
when the wild blasts drive on the lowering storm ,
of voices the many - tongued clang--
before he gave his paradise to fame ,
gluts every food alike in every moon .
my handsome tan - faced horsemen ! what life , what joy and pride ,
has had successful presentation .
justice would have some room
and lands triumphant on thessalia 's shores .
comes from out a bitter bin ,
below ! it seem'd a league below ,
into the forest - ocean spread below .
the tree - ice gleams ,
high throbbed her heart with hope elate
but may the gods grant thee to see thy wife and to come to
or the hapless one may perish
like ghostly riders on phantom steeds
saw ye not whom the reeking sabre smote ,
the breath from above
the fearful encounter began ! many of the natives were killed . one
ink - spotted over , shells of green and blue ;
offended fate , had saved the youthful knight ;
mottled with light .
and there in silence deaf and mirksome shade
and twice ten bosses the bright convex crown’d :
said baligant : " but canter now , barons ,
no raven had fed , and the hill - fox had fled ,
and with the imperial mulberry 's stain
on twirling toes
to ech of hem yaf thanne a yifte ,
mother , nor mother offspring -- which we see
we both dream ' neath the same kind sky,--
unless my lord his will declare ? ”
a buck , a beau , or " dem my eyes ! "
each in another 's eyes finds light , the light of compassion ,
i will go into his wigwam ,
if any wolf chance near the fold .
and softly take me in your armes tway ,
gave them uneasiness for several days .
grew sleek in dull content of wedded lives
just mix up their minds so that c. 's spice of craziness
and he fell upon their decks , and he died .
such harvest reap i of the seed i sow'd .
let poets feed on air , or what they will ;
thir devillish glut , chaind thunderbolts and hail
i saw a certain sailorman who sat beside the sea ,
your vessel , as i were some needy wretch
the count rollánd stands on the field , alone .
and ever and anon he beat
peer with faint glimmer , doubtfully descried ;
and then there was the plaintives costs ,
on the mead i am discerning ,
produce the proper motions ; but we see
the busy beaver -- that sagacious beast !
i come from betrothing the little kirstine . ”
if it lack the night and day . "
should such a man , too fond to rule alone ,
and drown awhile the bees ' sad murmuring tune
forbid by fate to reach his father ’s years .
wilt drag the clouds from heaven 's height ?
but as i sought and endlessly raved all the houses through
and with much twitter and much chatter ,
" never was bird , spoiled of its young , more sad ,
lay the lone coast of brittany .
and can she , by these rites abhorred ,
then rose his heart and cleared his brow ,
month -- dorothy remaining at coleorton , in charge of the children .
in a single combat      in the siege of battle
bluer than summer skies ,
yeo ho ! yeo ho !
" for myself i do not argue , " said i , " though i love you , madam ,
leighton , robert : poem , " sic semper tyrannis ! " by , 139 .
but he was swift with lance and shield , and supple of the wrist ,
long prayers , " i said , " in the world they say ;
whose name i can not think upon ?
and sadly given to the mortal sin
when on what 's good we may regale in peace .
plotted the three kings ;
this mangled trunk the foe may rend ,
due to antiquity to prove
hither and thither it seems to fly -
they will ask her much as follows :
who live like lords of that which they doo gather ,
_ uncle john._--listen to me , then .
  " slender .   i bruised my shin with playing with sword and dagger
from the jaw - bones of the monster ,
( the fact admits no question)--
as he which thanne was to wedde ,
nor from my holy law depart .
so hungry for the crowd 's acclaim ,
ambrosial odours and ambrosial flowers ,
to bed , to bed , kind turtles , now , and write
whilst the eternal lawrel hung ith ' air :
( o mother carey , mother !
have you not seen the timid tear ,
oh , i 'm sure i shall die ! " and he sank down and died ,
now lend assistance , and relieve the poor._--p . 270 .
hearing the tidings of the fatal blow ,
he had not heard a word from any human being about ulysses ,
glow bold no more , and all thy rage expires .
oh , but we 're grateful an ' glad to be there .
to friends , all love and constancy,--
the sultan 's turret in a noose of light .
and through the broken edge of tiles
he by his friends ' and kindred 's utmost aid ,
until , by the light of the evening star ,
that they did deem their privates and commanders
little we see in nature that is ours ;
i 'll therefore take our ancient friend don juan--
upon the forehead of humanity .
i ' adn't seen nothin' wrong .
she her strongst witts must stirre vp to her ayde .
with joy they then departed / from the land of burgundy .
nor think of one who is not thine .
a mortal or immortal grace ?
love seeks not place , all places are the same ,
i held aloof from all my brethren 's feasts
der frank is ride for 's leben ,
our lord the king , o’er earth who reigned ,
" forgive , kind sir , my stay ; our matin song
a something in his pretty face
shall the new growth , now worthier of the goal ,
rather than the faults of mankind , make our interest in the
where hundreds travel every day .
and gentle voices spoke ;
tenderly , day that i have loved , i close your eyes ,
and the sky , seen as from a well ,
to pay , unpaid , protested , or discounted
with faultering voice then would he sing
sentencing to exile the bright sun - god ,
oh the anguish of the women !
in our fire ! "
like you , contented with his native groves :
of east wind and mist
and patient of the long hours that are yours !
" the touch of her soft little hands on my head
bestow'd on your servant , the poet ;
out of a land filled with sighing ,
das grosse selige jenseits ,
by this new light ,
we found to fall echoing from side to side ,
a somme of gold , and him besoghte
many a hero i beheld
at the very least is due unto thee .
these , lord of men , with gold bedecked ,
shoulder pressing close to shoulder ,
" he of the queen 's apartment here was sight ,
no ; you 'll put the ' tween - decks stove out , bein ' sick !
the wild white horses foam and fret . "
by the elephants they perish -- this is through my luckless fate ;
who had so largely promis'd , and with voice
i 've ever stood as bride to groom ,
a routed army sailed upon the main
wainamoinen , old and faithful ,
glide to thy dim dominions , and are bound .
and though you run expectant as you always do
and on the balk he hew’d so brave ;
ah ! stay my darling a moment more ! "
and fan the feud , and lend the dardans aid ?
an ' manly preachers .
a milk - white steed bestrode ;
quod sum causa tuae viae ,
on~ the mowntayn~ here be - syde ;
the lyre whose strings give music audible
and , then came unhung , battling gloom !
by the sluggish canal
one which to all your kindred would bequeathe
and so noble in her stature ,
death and resurgence of our day and night ;
one for women to admire
taken , in their perfection , warm ,
nor for raiment nor food doth she care :
en mi pecho un secreto movimiento ,
where hurrying throngs rush by to seek for gold ,
extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
so full of pleasure , that her countenance
she enters -- holy alla , what a sight
delights my view .
with a crocodile 's egg and a large fish - tart .
until he has grown accustomed to his faults . "
made her adde wings to feare , and to that , flight :
as in cronique is yit withholde ,
gave them likewise hardy strength
romero chose a safe retreat ,
that proves him only half sincere ;
with always too much or too little to do :
the friend of both to pity was stirred ,
to late maryed men may me call . "
always the tortures of hell ,
and little children fatherless . "
across the brook of time man leaping goes
where tyranny glutted her malice
along the ell , and in the garret knelt
roland , to corselet and arm , was red--
since that has fallen far below
whiche is correct in his first tender age
versibus alternis opprobria rustica fudit(246 ) .
lived for her , hated and gladly had died for her !
fly diverse , scatter’d o’er the distant plain .
while my poor heart with love is burning .
of hem that were with him tho
i know not any way to blind it ;
thro ' ilka bore the beams were glancing ;
you know my outward life , my rank and fortune ;
of the morn ere she mounts .
but ah ! the leaves of summer that lie on the ground !
fierce turnus stood ; his levelled spear - head clave
is dark to light and joy !
should buy--
drink absinthe , which shall open out to thee
" has rent asunder wide as ours ?
and cry : _ long , long i 've look'd for thee . _
all in a tumult to his sun - kissed cheek ,
to me , and now my heart toward thee warms ;
and nights bright days when dreams do show thee me .
but only those . ' i do desire , ' he said ,
thy genius hungers , elegantly pain'd ;
and of their enemies ' defeat and fall ;
than live in slavish fear .
and up from the horizon dim
the _ mask seeing lion _ and _ peacock at home _ ?
changeful in temper , from sombre to smiling ,
the word to pipe all hands .
and quenched within her arms his fond desire ?
he sees afar the glory that lights the mountain - lands ;
o reckless despairing carols .
sunbeams brightly ,
" what art thou , that dost seem
thy stateliness knows neither joy nor sorrow,--
the lover and the love of human - kind ,
the eyes that erst had sparkled goldenly
be brought to own thy sway :
pledge i to thee if thou'lt harken to me . "
yet hast thou an untutor'd intellect .
and a huge black hulk , that was magnified
thus i unto my friend replied ,
and in his voice were sleep and tears ....
can give what in this realm ye covet .   stoop
emyra sung the pleasing cares of love .
what gave thee such courage then ?
lyth in hir bed and slepeth softe ,
_ er ever goin' to be _ !
who took the vase from the furnace ?
or who dare count him summoned worthily ,
to steal the honey from the bees .
stuck in behind its square of glass .
' tis , oh ! so eloquent .
for in these gods mine hands have wrought ,
" be merciful to me , a fool ! "
with halcyon harmonies untold :
of the wet woods old ,
the parliament soldiers are gone to the king !
stake on a chance a farmer 's stackyard ,
lent to some partial eye , disclosing all
the murmur of these trees ,
often he praises the fortunes of his sire ,
so make thy manhood mightier day by day ;
that fell upon her shrine could stir ,
of laurel leaves from ingersoll .
as now , as here , abundant crop of love .
two calves from her full udder she supplies ,
through the livelong night to glimmer ,
pray excuse my remarks , for i meant no such thing .
and with blood - red - color dyed ?
round troy -- but while this stood , troy could not fall .
the while they thus did parley / their ship did forward glide
rencor de muerte que en sus venas cunda ,
burst , morn , from the main !
lying close and giving ear
above his head hung blank and bare ,
old times .
melted in mists of light .
but the bushman is n't always ' trapping brumbies in the night ' ,
now titan veiled the stars and showed the shore ;
to that mysterious realm , where each shall take
for the thirsts of our nature brine .
like climbing some great alp , which still doth rise ,
clëis , beloved , thy eyes
to rank among the valiantest contend ,
then i answered him : " pray , who
and glittering steeps , echoing , re - echoing ,
i ca n't be bothered anyhow .
whether or not it be , i wot ,
will foremost in the van be seen ,
lest when thou thinkest not , and in thy sleep ,
to flourish on the air of liberty ,
who rose and stood before the king , and spake
whereby the truth from heaven slid
but now that death waylays me -- now i know
on his eyes the deer has fallen ,
and vivien answered , smiling scornfully ,
comst thou once more into seaborough tower ,
some god this arm with equal prowess bless !
made many a foeman mouth the dirt
the new , reigning , dolorous gods ,
to press my bed hereafter ; here to sleep
there was an old person of slough ,
miraculously found by one of genoa--
of lovers ' faith and friendship 's trust .
ah ! then and there was hurrying to and fro ,
passing along the fields and farms of men , do thou fare
the dolorous wood lies round it like a band ,
never more as supercargo
marry thursday , marry for crosses ;
o'er judah 's mountains rolled !
for earth 's divinest heritage
but a bit o ' better butter
" ' tis very strange , " said she to him ,
who call'd us into being to be bless'd ?
ðu _ ðreades ða _ ofer - hygdan = thou hast rebuked the proud .
little spring could not get past him ,
or your brighter eye should sway .
sharp - beaked , voracious , hungry for the deed .
--¿sufrir y nada más ? no , señor cura ,
an ' settle it _ fer good _ , she will !
with stately mansions , where the dove
drake , hawkins , and raleigh in squadrons came over
on pampá ’s bank wept uncontrolled ,
for king john wrote an awful fist .
the whole with its own splendour ; but the sun 's
the knight his son saw ready to depart ,
and thus to raghu ’s son he said :
till they echoed to his calling ,
i turn away . it is the hour of fate ,
quo magis accedunt , minus et minus utilis adsto :
seem less important now -- yet still
the seaman , poised in the bow , rises and falls
but they said , " it ai n't pleasant ,
with gratitude unfeigned .
( all , alas ! and well - away ! )
a god , and hast heard the word of a god , come , i pray thee ,
he read with her at church ; and , lo ! her name:--
for floating , with inhospitable wave
meet and are moved , each unto each endeared ,
we read how faunus , he the shepherds ' god , 406 .
disturb , no broken bough , thy rest :
may haply have bent me to stand and to show not
and yet , what weariness was on your tongue
such beauty that , in your brief sojourn here ,
into the trembling breast
of horrors of wyoming 's vale ,
in cold or sunny clime . "
but i was wise and closed my eyes
and hath his centre after the lawe
and in my folly
with a constant music laden ;
green spray showers lightly down the cascade of the larch ;
and loud behind him heard the din
and youth , from gathering flowers ,
but these may dream their happy dreams in death
of erebus ; the sun is blotted out
" if this great , outrageous fellow
is not pleased with this creation ,
o sleeper , awake !
close beside a frozen river ,
down from the height where the slow hawks hover ,
wars against the stiff brocade .
farewell ye partner of my woes , farewell !
my pathway lies before me clear ,
it was a summer evening ,
besides me none was near to mark
bot hier i finde thee so badde ,
“ for , ah ! what can an absent son bestow
of their engendering and of their birth !
_ the fool of fortune _ , shalt thou hail thy fate ;
plays within the halls and cabins ,
do not i love thee , o my lord ?
but leave much lasting bloom .
all covered o'er with hair ,
paul and peter then with pleasure ,
are polemical , and devoid of interest to the english reader . ]
that loosely flew to left and right--
of wild and wintry caucasus ! aloft ,
who , unenslav'd by fashion 's narrow tie ,
when the blewart bears a pearl ,
the town . when she reached her father 's house she drew up at the
the face of the sun , mighty echecles son of actor took the mother
and i knelt in prayer .
for singing to sylvia .
then saw i him come forth and bid them yoke
all the poems that they brought her ,
the man arose,--
" --'twas a time of alarms .   three chiefs - at - arms
of a plant ( in so far different that this is on the way , and that
no war , or battle 's sound
otherwhere , nor mine have missed
yet in the grass he 's emperor ,
but the city 's clamor
if truth be confest
glare , scenting the breath of each other .
or hear the goat - foot piping low : . . .
he couthe noght withdrawe his lok
with scraps of songs and smutty words
and you will shortly know that lengthened breath
to woman , and her favour woo .
or were too tirèd , dear .
and sought my room , and found there such relief
then on to various topics did they stray ,
verani , omnibus e meis amicis,--
and saw , as mighty as they ancient were ,
let nothing me remove
to join the glad throng of redeemed ones above .
quell'd not . retreating , at his coursers ' heads
and on raptures follow calms ;
and on just proof surmise , accumulate ;
and four , at once , and even five he slew ;
love is the sole excuse which i can urge
our cow is lowing loud , tied at the fence .
of all my joys , i will no more
for now no more the gods with fate contend ,
german signs of empire , dese ,
no , but unfurled ,
and stole the dew from every flower ,
that i should burn in passion 's fatal flame ?
and , promising , i freed myself therefrom .
' o gentle wind , that bloweth south ,
ring in the thousand years of peace .
hoists every sail , and shoots before the wind .
by an enchanted way
write me patronizing letters ;
and at the third question thou must not shrink ,
' e soon joined the ranks of the mutinous ' orde .
there was an old woman , as i 've heard tell ,
that afterward lombardz it hadde ,
up there we 'll gather more .
to shine in things so pretious .
' i know not , ' quoth the fellow , ' who or what
blazing within them , steadfast , pure , and strong ,
beating with odorous blood
have been neglected and in some part void . "
come down from heaven to meet me when my breath
i longed to thank thee , and my heart would frame
should be their glory .   slow , and full of doubt ,
l'amore , l'onore , le gesta
perchance in fairer skies ,
excipiatque novos et molliter ambiat artus .
give ye this little
so saying , like one blind , with bootless care ,
for this man , so foul and bent of stature ,
" let her decide , " he answered , with a sneer .
it glances off without a wound !
writhing on the reef with pinioned arms .
when he had spoke , the sinner rais'd his hands
of the kingly mausoleums ,
in the prime of the year it went with us ! "
my pearls must grace my maiden 's neck ;
my third joy — a cup fill’d up with wormwood . ”
of rose and violet ,
in those we love not , we no danger see ,
therefore , o spirit , as a runner strips
from your remotest vale .
and the clamor of the street ,
christ 's sleep nought injur'd you , indeed ' tis true :
that turn at autumn - time ....
for both of us was just seventeen
overburdened now the maiden
but only near st . james ;
was none but with the wine had bathed his breast .
--not as such union often ends ,
i have not flattered its rank breath , nor bowed
chatsworth ! thy stately mansion , and the pride
with the jostling and shouting of merry flowers
" hear her ! " he said--"her words her father 's heart
and sojourners beyond the sea
of english gentleman;--
_ et conspuebant illum . _ marc . xiv . 65 .
his way , with richardetto and the rest ;
spare me , and let me have lies hereafter . "
on with the dance ! let joy be unconfined ;
with mary alice . "   and once , " in court week , "
were his eyes open?--yes ! and his mouth too .
now to an ancient altar hecat ' own'd ,
kept in after school -- for a girl was caught
touches the sun ; so saw i there stream wide
the dead are coming back again , the years are rolled away
pues andáis en las palmas ,
written , must be matter of conjecture , though there is ground for
and there , through all their thousands , flashed like flame
though much thou grievest
his syrian upland 's flashing wave
" o my earth , are the springs in thee dry ?
with an aureate nimb ?
and bumboat pan , my sons , and figs galore ,
i 've felt its icy clasp ;
they take the sweet sad silence for a pall ,
haig is moving !
makin ' tend he kin measure you for yo grave ,
he hears our faintest prayer ;
in at the widder 's , and talk o ' the crop
nala , of his foes the slayer -- damayanti 's lord beloved ?
all power on him transferr'd : whence to his son
" i peril but the single life of one
de los ojos cubrir la luz inmensa .
and a harbour as well where my vessels may ride .
( most shy , most clever in concealing
necessity , and not delight , impels us .
leap upward , singing !
for the very best rule that you 'll hear in a week--
i learned the only way to step ,
mute outwardly , yet inwardly i said :
by simeon , and the triune mystery
but , ere the steely clouds began their war ,
on slavery 's neck .
and they are gone : ay , ages long ago
and through the spears have fought our way ,
faded long and long ago !
the morning after death
upon the sun at a white wheel
then in there cooms a great lord mayor ,
a thinkin ' of the times that she
they hasted to go forth without the wall
i saw the death - fires lighted on the shore .
the favorites of the sultan ,
his dolefull fate that late him loved deare ;
arrow - heads of chalcedony ,
so wildly i have read!--
one was wise and one was fair ,
for seers yet ; who , in some wizard way ,
now shortly after the groomb
and seide , " lo , mi goode diere ,
then came a warm , still day of may
but if a villain stained with crime
with saws pragmatical , and maxims sage ,
of brain - disturbing bacchus down the steep
and groans the earth beneath her sheaves of slain .
as iris is by iris , and the third
and vast as mount kailása ’s height ,
his other virtues i should ill commend ,
fresh - blowing , but not dang'rous . sev'nteen days
the forked lightning flashes evermore ,
thus replied the tearful aino :
with various skill delineated exact ,
of luxury was so shameless , that she made
low - tide in soul , like a stagnant laguna .
beyond the indian mount ; or faery elves ,
with smell of ripening fruit .
when you i love not , then unloved by me
sweet echo is no more .
who sought your friendship ere the war began !
" but you wo n't go ? " pleaded jenny .   " for _ my _ sake richard ? "
as when a falcon , bird of swiftest flight ,
as , seraph - like , from out the dark clouds ' chorus ,
business . "
and whispered that their little ones were hushed in bed .
enamoured of me in youth 's early tide
crawling , writhing , hissing , stinging ,
the far , fir trees that cover
a worthy man of paris town , 153 .
to the chambers of wainola ,
and your brown eyes would look to ask if i were serious ,
to thee is ope the juncto o ' th ' abysse ,
gladly the few shall die ,
quivers a shadow vaguely mocking man .
before the blast the lofty harvests bend :
like the star with fiery tresses .
and i could ask if what i saw ,
deaf to her voice , while blooming nature calls ;
the organ , in whose tones the ocean rolled ,
enthroned the terrors of his holy might !
the roman ruler ;      of his realm he despaired ;
and makes friends with the rain .
they make a mean show as a fence .
resplendent , flashing terror on the greeks ;
and , rising , entered where the subtle power
they might deserve a good man 's blame ;
that the forest moaned and shuddered ,
she norandino , in return , addressed ;
how to this spot you found your way ,
in his age a beauteous maiden ,
the wondrous gifts and power ,
when satan established himself in this zone
the greks under the holinesse
to thy white garments floating past ;
and a second time it wandered
between the tree - tops and the skies , her sight
“ ’ twill profit me in scanty guise
both virtue and wisdom in athens appear'd ,
and all alone the people 's guilt my sword shall wipe away ;
and when we have the child commended
old lady , put your glasses on ,
stroll'd and sang with joyful mind ,
mounted the solitary islet 's side .
he shall bear me far to - night . "
although i fear
is daily seen to go ,
steeps them in the blood of serpents ,
for what the muse might send me !
general gravitation , chemical affinity , or animal appetency ,
a windflower leapt
thy body were abolished and consumed ,
echoes of dreamland shall bear them along .
but snaebiorn laughed and snaebiorn sang ,
singing most joyfully .
shook over him ; he , life imploring , clasp'd
once in a dream ' twas granted unto me
hung on a dewdrop 's quivering throat .
and young benjie was her ae true love ,
the love of a son must keep .
ye have made me , ye have made me
kate soon will be a woefu ' woman !
ah yes!--i now remember -- her adorer--
into the frosty starlight , and there moved ,
from the renown'd patroclus slain by me .
if ever wretch by anguish grieved
tok of a dragoun the semblance ,
underneath the bemummying wrappers of sect ;
who blushing , and with much demur
wheresoe're you chance to find him
apollo from his shrine
" tell the boys the war is ended , "
oh , make the most of what we yet may spend ,
and he 's known as " bully boy brown " !
the scroll of rising winds , the burst of suns ,
of two fierce wolves , in dread of both alike :
fly discontented hence , and for a time
his werre he fond thanne endeles ,
juturna sees , and smit with sudden fear ,
called ‘ cyllenia proles . ’ strabo says that he was the son - in - law
the stagg'ring fury of its starting bounds ,
our blooms we bring , and while we sing ,
and give to each its purpose , like a king
athirst for praise , ascanius bends his bow ;
and there ( they trust ) there swimmeth one
languor can not be :
a ship of worthy fame ,
foules parley ( chaucer 's ) , iv .
we seek it not ; we should not find .
yet in this deep suspicion rest thou not
learn'd things , that to his victory gave rise
" requiem of lincoln " : poem by richard storrs willis , 167 .
and swift and swift , in wondrous guise ,
vvith short returne he comes to her againe ,
but safe in southern , gave the fleet repose ,
mystic word in mercy 's tone ?
he is no lengere forto lieve .
must haue a passage , or ' twill force a way .
where rolled the ocean , thereon was his home ;
i straight obey'd ; and with mine eye return'd
a golden finger o'er the purple road ;
in the crash of the cannonades and the desperate strife ;
little gossip , blithe and hale ,
that lists the tuck of drum . "
brow--"in this head we find ideality large -- abnormally
" as we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another
all windings and unwindings of the highways ,
o'er it a cobweb - lawn ;
timid and free--
and breathe so soft they shake not a single shuddering leaf
" they rule the world without the vote . "
milking - stool behind him , and said , " thank goodness _ that 's _
sobs with love , aching with sweet fear ?
glorious at any time , but most of all
paved with red basalt of the paduan hills .
is left a sample of the perish'd race ,
' mid teuton hordes and scythian , though by sword
falter upon the threshold of the shrine ,
and dogs his carcase , and my grief should cease .
fair ellen remember'd and sigh'd ,
a bulwark , which for ages stood
but , overflying him , the spear in earth
although ' tis but a memory ,
still ending , still renewing , through mid heaven ,
musks and ambers more from her :
close the teeth , and long the handle
this fearful curse
but the night and its long noon of horrors is past ,
children , ye have not lived : for this is life .
but labowreth for mo , and alway doth deuyse
" knut shall reign when i am dead ,
was appointed judge and ruler .
or what of tidings you abroad doo heare ;
and slowly that outweighs the ponderous globe,--
with canon and with catechism .
but idly thou reject'st the charm
she wish'd not then for what the night denied :
when the heat slowly hazes and the sun
as i can now discern with this clear eye ;
what that bright heart was destined to befall !
where over fields and pastures green
he stopped , the air came moist , si did not speak ;
which makes his heart so cruel and so hard ,
jusqu'a l'echo d'oberwesel !
o'er vales and mountains sumptuous cities swell .
above the world , on wings of love , i rise--
ahti wars no more in northland ,
the earth dreamed in dews , the sheep were in the pastures ,
hang golden poitrels , glorious to behold .
the pots and pans had all retreated ,
finely organized , or born in a happier age , may recognize them as
are gathering on the peaceful strand ,
saying , " i will roam no more to foreign countries ,
turn'd rapid round , and thus the demon spake :
and them that comes behin ' ,
the day love nightfall and her dew ,
a peacock fed in a farm - yard
this janasthán , praśravaṇ ’s hill ,
he is a gentle roebuck ; for how else , i pray , could he
her mother crying for her ,
yet even he shall weep , when all the host ,
i see the years to come as armies vast ,
be delivered . for this purpose hermes is to be sent to
in answer to their questioning ?
the track of fled souls , and their milky way ,
once in the wind of morning
and scarcely fa'en asleep ,
tumblers in the mask of life ,
and i know how soon ,
and little men climbed her high seats and sold
my lord 's protecting hand alone would raise
through honeysuckle flowing ;
heaven above and earth below be my witnesses , with the waters of
had she never seen the sunlight ,
untouched , unshared by mine ?
in the middle of a brook,--whose silver ramble
atqui sciebat quae sibi barbarus
quaintest , richest carol of all the singing throats !
to this higher plain , o lift me ,
how this mischance the cyprian queen befell ,
tug at the cliff - boulders ,
they are more shy than snow .
questing , the hounds ; behind them , swift , the sons
and ' t is moreover most expressly mark'd
hath she no rarer bliss than all this sin ,
our grecian heroes ; but the time shall come
i sat and spun within the doore ,
untainted with iniquity , in wise
i , myself , am eager , very ,
this was a place of those described by me ,
of word or deed at ilium , where ye fell
as the hand of the dyin ' boy clung to
ah !   love , hadst thou been wise enough to save
yonder there flow , untwining and twining their loops anew !
it haunts my soul when none is nigh :
thine is the conquest , thine the royal wife :
wherein were golden brooches , twelve in all , fitted with
the bending moon drinks up the lotus .
his chariot drove ; one fate o'ertook them both .
si che celano i piedi , e l'altro grosso . _
caught at a court ; purged off by purer air ,
had no way of harming me .
or dozing in the shade ,
again , from whom himself had challenged forth .
no dolphin came , no nereid stirr'd ,
pan . bake at 375 ° f . for 35 to 40 minutes or until light
send these pains , and ills , and tortures ,
my dead joy go singing by .
he on the dapple grey ;
her tangled sunbeams and perfume .
that haunt the forest 's social solitude .
like sairey gamp's -- the dear old sinner ?
i sought the ocean 's deeply - flowing stream . "
hark ! with the tempest 's shrieks the human cry !
like some full , splendid fruit hesperian
from pole to pole the forky lightning flies ;
in deserts where no men abide ,
to scan the future , and draw back the veil ,
how they laugh at wisdom , her ca nt and rules !
ho ! bring the prisoner back !
with the little children by--
the pale yellow woods were waning ,
the world may be more fair beyond all these ,
" what can i do ? " says betty , going ,
and all the virgins bear their part ,
with all her mays unwed . "
of horse and foot conflicting furious , there
he soffreth his adversite .
ere long shalt thou , while wrongs like these degrade ,
that ring the tune of enderby .
what summers broke that brooding reverie ,
have i made shake ; and by the spurs pluck'd up
and fondly they wander'd whar nane might discover
and , if he praise earth 's edifice ,
against the sweet duties and pleasures of home .
the light barks flying with the sail and oar ;
after the two brothers had talked over this grave affair , they
the gorgades we pass'd , that hated shore ,
remark here again that custom contemns
returned to tell the wonders she had seen .
and reddened deep the snow .
too shocking ' tis for earth to hear--
this air is most oppressive!--madam -- the duke !
armenian tigresses , or charybdis disturbed by the south wind . nor
with nitre and black oil - lees , that the fruit
" burgundian lewis ye behold descend
and now , the more i think , the more i find ,
as well give up to perish ,
the picture news was suddenly pushed in .
whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced ,
austrian uniform .
that dwelt with you ; tignoso and his troop ,
the place where to descend the precipice
of low winds sweeping free ,
and pays for his crumbs
his eagle sends , she stoops in vaine.<37.14 >
come through the darkness . at the dreadful voice ,
to the new - heavened say,--
but never , never can forget
the new world still is all less fair
then mount , my merry horsemen all ,
and the crimson stream flows onward .
again thou enchantest my ear ;
tick , tack , too .
she who held her head the highest ,
as i to the town was going one day
that memory sees things as they were ,
he kept her foolish words within his heart
through breaking woods her rustling course they hear ;
decerte doth so that it is
all was as her hand had left it late :
by one mighty impulse led--
to wretched son and wife your hand extend :
pure love will make thee still the spirit 's bride .
left his own country , how he took me by the right hand at
produced without the powers of king .   the same year he published
which burned that old man of the cape .
and solace them that weep .
_ none knows my grief but god alone _ ,
for something yearns , and hoping is appeased .
turn your face from me , beloved , and forgive me my pain .
þe ȝates stoken watȝ neu{er } ȝet ,
small stones , into the deep water she cast her forlorn body .
and a melting kiss restore me .
and see the shepherds feed their flocks
o lang the lassie i had wooed ,
now but _ one _ thing more is wanted .
around shine many a marble shaft
yes , to rid the world of kwasind ,
oh , the pretty flowers ,
doubt you with the monster 's fry
your hand is on the helm of state ;
a lamp before a shrine .
there are things of which i may not speak ;
with my easy flowing line
oh give me back their sweetnesses again ,
can make the cares and toils of daily life .
that glimmered wanly ' neath a moonless sky .
the whole world hath delight
--the sages
doom nymphs to shame , condemn the fauns to laughter .
_ thrawn _ , sprained , twisted , contradicted , contradiction .
was natural enough ; my jaundiced sight ,
salute them with your thumbs to your noses .
throughout eternity ; for time shall fall
_ what hast thou done , thou , weeping there ?
that would bring down his spirit , and , no doubt ,
he dodged , -- and i have never seen him since .
the bishop kept watch and ward .
i dare not use that word , for what if heaven
how small , to mortal minds ,
with fiery and resistless might ,
to hear that still he loves , still longs for , me ,
and , distant far , prolong'd the dismal yell ,
he added that when frost sets in
# more deliberate .   solemnly chanted . #
or the sweet little orphans dear
when were built the rocks azoic ,
on his right hand gives admission .
gradually wasting away .
saying,--'that is the unhappy woman ,
night threw her darkling chain ;
nor believed in all my lifetime ,
and the ladies had each an ice .
" if you and i were ghosts in love
o're sea and land : him satan thus accostes ;
or the ring of a woman maybe
hanúmán ’s tongue has truly shown
till priam 's spacious city be your prize .
the wave - voice seems the voice of dreams
and when his mind was brought to fix on one
to soothe his edge . the riders went
mercy ; and we shall grant it , and dictate
us his prime creatures , dignifi'd so high ,
to wainola 's peaceful meadows ,
roam though i may o'er many a distant clime ;
that were approaching upon divers sides .
sown with contrition in his heart , than those
from olden times returning
the smile he used to love with , then as now .
beneath the wild wave buried , which rolls on
and yet it swims , or seems to swim , the main !
at first they move a little slow ,
laws for themselves and not for me ;
on telamone 's haven , there to fail
and the fabric he made
beside her little humble stream . _
i think just how my shape will rise
cui subter artis faucibus
stoop and look beneath this war - ship ,
ere the whitening of the dawn ,
for now that i am old i know it is best
on which the sun of greece looks down ,
the lily that lingers a - faint on the stalk :
my mother ( then at home ) with all her maids
holding a long white staff in his right hand ,
in beauty 's lap , recalls his home ;
i of the parish ask'd relief ,
mainardo pagani , xxvii . 50 .
help ! fire ! ho ! help ! the flames of hell !
on norwegia 's rocky lands--
was one of the vice - presidents of the london browning
beneath the softly twinkling shade .
sunshine or show'r , and chides the madding tempest .
there was sumitrá too , and there
like raiment heavy with the rain
straight the master - builder , smiling ,
and peeped out of the spout ,
the echoing wood , the winding flood ,
--viviré desconocido ,
they read aright the writing on the wall
you 've dandled them and fed them from the book
that mocks the tear it forced to flow ;
now manto comes , endu'd with mighty skill ,
sure then ween'd each beholder that he never more
i bring my sins to thee
_ he speaks , musingly . _
hath trodden heavily , and with backward start
love and the graces evermore do wait , ii . 68 .
the same unvaried murmuring .
brookside , the                 _ richard monckton milnes _
the war , the wound , the groan , the funeral pall --
and thou -- thou lov'st my voice ? fond accolon !
a savour of camels and carpets and musk ,
and burn in cupid 's flames -- but burn alive . "
companions , saying , " wake , and sit on the benches , and loose the
the libel’d person , and the pictur’d shape
of love be silent now ! we gaze adown
if such as i might understand ,
within twelve days at furthest we 'll wend upon our way . "
lest sheep and rambling goats the place annoy ,
the army of christ ( which it so clearly cost
cease , and command the others to do likewise . '
early , before the worlds light - giving lampe
with the bars of my windows narrow and tall ;
god gave great harvests to vale and plain ;
woe to thee , my ancient father !
your eyes the sweetest blue .
of those who live when length of years
about her dancing knees , and made
attend , and speedy thou shalt pass the main :
then her fear changed in impulse ; and hiding her face
a rapping on the floor above reminded her that she had forgotten
had poured from many quarters on the strand :
more readily in manner of wild - beasts ,
now to some foreign clime inclined to fly ,
your sense of truth , ma'am , must be small ,
most willing to remoue you i will dye ,
his ' prologues ' as indicative of his individuality
his conscious dealings , while ' tis known ,
then on the ice with caution stalking
yet remains open .   its gates , years have not closed them to you .
what little captives now repine ,
gleam in the binders ' arms .
that weird enchantress , who melissa hight ,
i could not see my mackintosh!--it was not to be seen !
bless thy people and thy city ,
helmet flower ( monkshood )              _ knight - errantry . _
bides its bitter destiny .
with many a shriek of helpless woe ;
thoughts of my youth ,
has warmed , or water had the power to wet ,
as a queen without a scepter .
ere out on the shrieking shoulder
snaps a small string : lo ! all the song that stirred
" fool , " the " craven , " and the " sentimentalist , " but that it is a
the prize of glory , and my soul exults .
my husband 's bed respecting , and not less
in the pale shape of dreams -- when to the bed
right on their heads . my lord was sorely frightened ;
" yes ! ... he loves me , " she sigh'd ; " this is love , then -- and yet ! "
sing merrily , truth : i tried to put
and he smote it in his anger ,
germanosque patris referam matrisque nepotis
what pain , established in so sweet a place ,
( which , strange as it may seem , is wordsworth )
hung round his neck by hands he knew not whose .
you are rulers of the earth !
the feast of daulis , the thracian sea .
this world 's turmoil ;
the magical car had come to stay .
to the third circle from the highest , there
a dream is a feeble ray of light ,
until the market , unsupported , broke :
( ll . 458 - 471 ) then , as i have heard , when the lord of babylon
and pale facades are waiting till it pleases
now i smell ,
" pastorals , " but more particularly in the " georgics , " our poet is
of every game couthe an ende ,
prove in strong brain her noblest born ,
he said ; and tow'rd the ships idomeneus
from that familiar dwelling , where she moved
then to the stream side , gladly we 'll hie ,
yet soon , indeed , before his door he stood ,
that our heart - broken parting is so nigh .
where the tangled barberry - bushes
more wretched yet ! to live and be
the world ’s wheels .
an ' didn ' knaw nort o ' fear ,
be for mere fancy 's sport a theme creative ,
nor less bold hector , and the sons of troy ,
incomparably close and vast ...   one might
the aged winter totters down
till every soldier grasp a phrygian wife ,
shows how it can not be answer'd .
reason , to think of god when she pretends ,
that neither the lily nor the rose
their days of rest the youths and gallants spent .
another cries out brokenly of sin .
with deathless eyes aflame for england 's sake ,
from the loose net of words to deeds again
an ' as for weddin ' jack ,
every look and every word
you have smashed my sledge to pieces .
at the mountain 's feet soft streaming ,
into whose silence , lethe 's currents roll .
from whose high top to ken the prospect round ,
no thought has he but for his prize .
my temper of malignant kind ;
of hours that have too soon slipped past ,
swill’d with the wild and wasteful ocean . ”
came onward fierce in warlike pride .
the announcement of galileo 's discovery of the four satellites of
and fervently i 'll love ,
and burn'd the shaft , that first her brest did moue ,
all of the olden time .
' white , ' he replies , ' let it be white , of course ,
this is my comfort when she 's most unkind , ii . 151 .
and heavenly contemplation dear ,
outside in their true shape . and thus , when first
that thought away , turn , and with watchful eyes
experience , like a sea , soaks all - effacing in .
to taste the barrel .
bestir you , one and all , to go with me , that ye may see
little hand all well again .
odioso vivir ?
the black disguise , the warning whistle shrill ,
weltering in the bloody water ,
yet which seem to lend assistance
he sat before the fireplace
thou'rt jostled along by many crowding cares ,
he raised his face as if to pray . _ the strong _ ,
the innumerable leaves
beware!--but hark , what sounds are these ?
as dark and desolate and deep
said he , " in this troop i may fairly take pride ,
of brash and boyish crime ,
that never any promises fulfil ;
to that silent isle , which lies
" my love lay bloody on the strand
in dreamy music seemed to roll
and thinking , " what a funny
to christian , and no miracle been wrought ,
fro bangor , and lucie he hihte ,
as if that prince the sentinel had played
and if i gain , -- oh , gun at sea ,
and all his years were two hundred and five winters , and he
my scottish rebels were not half so bad,[j ]
nor from the ash its foliage rend ,
and taught me work was truer joy
his candle just at twelve o'clock began to burn quite palely ,
they had assign'd the noblest prize of all .
and my checks are white with sorrow ,
v. 131 .   joachim . ]   abbot of flora in calabria ; " whom the
there is a city , in the deep recess
what do i care for the problem i 've written
bot if thei weren in presence ;
mackay , robert : sketch of , 151 ;
and they pulled it and they dragged it ,
her house - flag was bright green with strips of white ;
who will not fear the work to do ,
no picture of earth 's glory like to what
before me bends the rye
of drink that is fit for a saint ! "
through the wet slope of the air
quién vive pared en medio ,
and you will call me " mother ! "
manalainen 's trumpet called him ;
these fair abodes that ring the firmament ,
for aye there 's wark that 's bude to get
surrounded by the flashing spears
the rheth'rick of my hand
and cry , " god save the king !
their shadows ' wat'ry bed !
an ' this 'll keep the people green
( with languid sleep - smile you had said
of pyramid with ire , and crush
an elder fashion,--
what ! and must a thwarted nation
tulips , like the ruddy evening streaked .
" ' the critic eye -- that microscope of wit--
shall all be extracted
already when their bark was first espied
they tore off his stockings , his shoes , and his drawers ;
he seldom passed a lodger ’s bed
do , break down the partition - wall
the old worn motley stained with rain and tears ,
para abarcarla se cansaba en vano ;
¡ oh ! ¡ que esta santa alianza eterna sea ,
neither the better heritage obtains .
for life alone must round us dwell .
you liked me then , i think ;
that no unseemly place my heart possest ,
was that the contractor did
larruped himself in his lonely cell ,
in such a shape dost thou behold thy god .
simply and plainly will i utter all .
beyond thy sons decrepit ?   it is long
was wishing , indeed , to say somewhat to you . "
child in bed , they slumber--
shivering , on the floor and walls !
nor the lazy chub to fool ,
that it might bear the bound of many a shaft .
' lo ! love yet bids thy lady greet thee once:--
but midst the lightning did the fair sun die--
but now , if solemn oaths can prove ,
save the appointed knight
throw such seed as he has clear over into that darkness
sat the black - bird , the thrush , the lark , and the linnet ;
the rain
long the flank , and high the chine ,
listening to her , eye his eye .
the road o’er kuṭiká ’s fair brook .
if any ask me why ,
remember'd it from childhood all complete
sudden as that the lurid hosts recall
heeded his behests      in holy customs ,
and you some day this truth will learn:--
white , in a garden green with springing grass ,
it 's easy to make a memorandum
rockest the cradle of the child ,
their pinions , ostrich - like , for sails outspread ,
says brown , as he pulled off a big roastin'-ear
care that his experiment upon it should be tried out of
hung mute above her clay .
they are ideal husbands . "   maurice somerville
o osmunda                   dreams .
with them went the wise odysseus . i said that after sore
and life 's fine loyalties are turned to jest ,
but say ,
thus the bridegroom was instructed ,
with female monsters evil miened
his patients gave him no trouble :
of shattered dwellings , to take the brunt
singing and shouting to port she races ,
were hung upon his loom .
but that rail led to glory , as certin and shore
and then , across the breathless wood , a bell began to sound ,
but smooth at last the walks umbrageous smile ,
before i lost my love , he said to me :
haec tua , persephone , maneat clementia , nec tu ,
could not hear the wild - moose bounding ,
and naught save longing trees remain . ”
some solace in each other 's look and speech ,
i hop'd to raze the strong - built walls of troy ,
ecce stupent miseri , ah , nec meminere loqui .
to the young dreams within--
with a friendly light in his deep - set eyes ,
happy the friends whom death can not divide !
an ' never mentioned chamberlain !
and they the prey of the gales ;
each face a gen'ral smiling doth adorne .
advancements , and particularly by the introduction of twelve new
a fitful flame , but cautious , lest its light
ther sprang a welle freissh and cler ,
the pulse of heaviest feet !
was on its rise , but yet so slight esteem'd ,
“ soon with thy boughs wilt cover,--bear the mark
across the circus in his hand , a gift
give the light of your look to each sorrowing spot ,
noble son - in - law and brother ,
o for but a moment
hushing the magic of his gurgling beak ;
and thus the face denoting by the beard ,
will run as hushed as when they were a thought .
a peril mighty to destroy .
the body of her darling polydore
william hawes , the strand apothecary who attended goldsmith ,
the claimed " obvention"of four - pence goes ;
ages ago .
for three or four times they sed it he d stall’d ,
of lambs and lanes and london town .
i ' m loth to leave the place again .
i shall not let you dance again to - night . "
then shun the wrong , pursue the right--
as well he might who paid that goodly price ,
dem . o child , my child ! that were a temple indeed .
fairy wedding - bells faintly rung to us
the unbending herbage , noiseless , dark , and slow ;
and faintly trust the larger hope .
she , the holy little maiden ,
i ca n't even kiss her without .
thereupon the harp made answer ,
upon the red - men like a spell !
mad drunk and resisting the guard --
" why do you write ? " he asked me gloomily .
were crimsoned .   one his brother slew , nor dared
i listen to hear the policeman 's deep tread .
communicating from the author of otho ; he , therefore , hopes you
do not despise the humble weed ,
arranging plans how every cent
learned in the law ?   aye , from gamaliel .
through the depths beloved by salmons
then as the dark blood trickled down its side ,
remote , but dwelling everywhere ,
with what a heavy , heavy spirit
saint peter searched the sordid pack ,
great isis , seems herself to stand .
« y acuda á tus chillidos
the first long breath of freedom ; when the flower
i last spent with you , love ,
mystical hearing for every one !
to the fair fount and blissful bower
but wherever love brightens a dwelling ,
my trail is in the dew .
wholeness victorious , halfness doomed to fail ,
i , whether lately through her brightness blind ,
the social world with blander falsehood graced ,
let me not hear her voice ;
knit with the graces and the hours in dance ,
milton 's strong pinion now not heaven can bound ,
but by the tide of song that from his bosom springs ,
the growing age what dangerous glories dwell
if we procure not to our selves more woe .
whether in this world we shall meet again !
proud youth , and tell thy terrors to the slain .
then drain the goblet at one draught profound ,
and all the rest in thee . "
all your fretting will not help you ,
forgive whate’er i wildly speak :
if health and contentment it constantly yields .
but on the deck no watch , no pilot move ,
whose grave duties were like the pivot of state .
thy fashioned brand of the battle through good and evil to burn ,
the fair beginners of a nobler time ,
a walk in the moonlight has pleasures , i own ,
you look as if you could despise
think , since this life is but a span ,
but of white summer clouds , and blown
now tyrants rise , once more to bind
a woman 's form now imaged doubtfully ,
nor rested day nor night ;
easy to me it is to tell thee all
one whom the shrewd ægisthus had seduced
' tis a vision :
plashed and washed the dreamy waters ;
many the hearts that bled ,
count it not hard henceforth , when thou dost hear
and mighty ajax , son of telamon .
abraham and loth lived in these dwellings and had
as oft as mankind proves degenerate .
beyond his own control , the constant thirst
at the city 's southeast section ,
till that day when you opened the door in the hall ,
reform ! reform ! cries out the longing nation;--
flashing like spring on many an eye ,
wondering , aglow ,
in every cranny but the right .
the men who judged him were old and grey
right honestly , ' he liked an honest hater!'-
" is there , " cried i , " in bethlehem
he demanded twice the cost .
my friend , my friend !
some nurse new waked , who , whispering low the name
mercury , who was noted for his thieving propensities . ]
and no man stirs in his long repose .
warwick          with his manner scarcely mild
nullum ultra verbum aut operam insumebat inanem ,
he never met upon the plains of troy
direct us , how we soonest may arrive ,
if , amoret , that glorious eye ,
you now owe me ten times more .
lovers lay at mid - night
and an orchard for a dome .
i that saw where ye trod
creep afore ye gang ,
names that glimmer ghostly
there 's big work to do , and that 's why you are here .
white on one side were they painted ,
watȝ non autly i{n } ouþ{er } , for aungels hit wern ,
about her body rippled here and there ,
more love they light , which folds the love of earth .
and wyld bestes ther goyng ,
created in his image , there to dwell
than lightning 's flash , or thunder 's roar .
“ brave sons of mine , i knew not how
to meet again , in nice , too . for you see
v. 82 .   laurence . ]   who suffered martyrdom in the third century .
as on'y a dorg could bear to ' ear . "
but justify thy laws to me
these pleasures melancholy give ,
that overal his name spredeth ,
for love of leda , whiter did appear ;
when the radiant morn of creation broke ,
poor buonamico , shivering , crept .
that he could not stand a wetting !
where the scrubs and plains are wide ,
sing to the tune either of life , or death ;
along the joyous pastures whilst the drops
at an epoch of my prime ;
said even a prayer to that patroness fair ,
the curling wave , then , falling on his shield
to take her finger 's measure ,
“ with cruel wound , peleus far distant saw ;
that killed the rat ,
in leaf , flower , mould , and tree ,
we owe thee -- the saints suffered meekly
  the florin which bore on the obverse the figure of john the
_ yeldrin _ , a yellow hammer .
lxxxi . a custom in hesperian latium reigned ,
poems plain on every face ;
he recited the last answer that they gave him . conaire and his
both knights leap on the earth , and , quick as light ,
an human shape the infant mass receives ,
is this so sure where all men 's hopes are hollow ,
no voice ; but o ! the silence sank ,
he turned his back and faster ran ,
song , " nay , but you , who do
scornful wast thou ; and in the movement of thine eyes grave and
into deep dreamless slumber .
his fode , such riht as him liste ;
where all is still , and cold , and dead ,
fair hands the broken grain shall sift ,
general brown , in the cannon 's roar
one flash of it within the tavern caught
and within your border once
though a descended pleiad , will not one
and so to me my very name
reply of hers to our intelligence ! _
  exaggeret , b.
college from 1734 to september , 1738 . at eton he had as
from fields where glory does not stay ,
by toilsome men , content to be his slaves ?
und mit ihm spielen
to dwell with our brothers , the men--
filling the room with their fragrant scent .
how opposite a way my buried flesh
i can rip your very heartstrings out with those ;
as the storms rock the ravens on high ;
the third one was right sweet .
chrysanthemum , red                     _ i love . _
þat gentyl sayde “ lys no ioparde ,
and more than well becomes the day ?
white diana , cupid sweet,--
and caged him there for ever ;
ere through the world our way we take ;
on him for ever , and for him alone ,
the wind blew hard , and out went the moon .
this said i , walter , for thy sake
with stately port he moves ;
the goodly friar had fixed his quiet seat ;
that has brought me all this trouble ,
thou in high rank wast wo nt to hold
the just man 's judgement .
proputty , proputty , proputty -- that 's what i ' ears 'em saäy .
she thinks , i 'm certainly a genius , now ,
are you bought by english gold ? is it love the lying 's for ?
a strong foundation now is laid with care ;
far away!--onward upward ! "
he prayed to god and myld mary
out of her fertile dark to sing and run
and with him thorstein , viking 's son , the peasant good .
to such expression as the stars may use ,
inhabitants of earth , so that they no longer had control
he spoke , as if deputed by mankind .
light back to them , is obvious to dispute .
with a chord of faith in the harp of bliss :
through faint prophetic fashions,--stands declared
a - battling with the ocean 's storm and strife ,
_ and he answered them nothing . _
when rises contention ,
above the deck appear .
and he 'll beat you , beat you , beat you ,
depopulation !   thee another flood ,
but , looking round , he saw no change there was
quem sub millenis semper contutibus unum
oh heauens , what new - founde griefes possesse my mind ,
near the mansion of aaron hatfield ,
skulls changed to stone:--when fires no longer burn
oh ! what was love made for , if ' t is not the same
saying the sight of his curtius was worth the whole journey from
time passed : forgot james taylor and his shame--
saying : " speak thou : this one a latian is . "
if t ' coontry goes to t ' dogs , it 's 'cause they 've sent
with hem that stonden misbelieved ,
and like to ruddy gold his fine hair was :
had placed his staff across the broad smooth stone
i sought eternal loveliness , and seeking ,
rang above me , as lauding her candid say ,
and the child of mine own mother .
" that mantles in olympian bowls,--
say , where full instinct is th ' unerring guide ,
was taken poorly , and retired ;
the truth , she 'd ruther stay to hum
because in all things he was like - minded with himself . '
evermore to take his part
from palma,[a ] thus far , with a tedious delay ,
" in the course of my travels i often have seen
the faithful friend , and chearful night ,
one radiant vista of the realm before us,--
throw the door open !
of shattering maxim fire made mad the wood ;
making night glorious with your smile , where are ye ?
at them this day . "
was not the meed ; there came the festival ,
he is brave whose tongue is silent
bloodless is thy cheek , and cold
that all be to forgetfulness consigned ;
bounded from morning till dark ,
while , like a guard between ,
see ! all these tiny blades are hands
never to thee presented art or nature
should image back thy thought ,
“ here ráma dwells , ” he thought ; “ at last
thou who hast deigned the christian 's heart to call
suk'ka - mie'li .    the goddess of love .
not , mother , yours to weep ,
with a light not their own , thro ' the jordan 's deep tide ,
i could not miss the scope at which he aim'd .
lies helpless by my shafts subdued .
i can not say ; but he had pinioned close
and you want to read , sir !
beyond the earthly and the fugitive ,
you are only happy in your body that is so lovely
there , from the blowing and raining ,
sing with miriam by the sea ,
and the three listed hues , on each side three ;
most piteous to be seen ,
having been chased from london down
and pil'd in bloody heap the host of france .
but they never started training till the sun was on the course
then melted human hate and human vengeance , too ,
and , like a cup that 's full , my heart is fill'd
and both of these , the very truth to say ,
then took some tobacco , and soberly said ,
as there we stood , on me the mantuan fix'd
" oh , cherry - time is a merry time ! "
with courage to endure .
but still it filled me with relief ,
my steps aside . "   she answering spake : " hadst thou
in alternations of sublime repose ,
and all their busy torment , and their fire ,
dully and wildly drives the rain :
broad pastures grazed by flocks and herds , but there
to other things , once strange , i 've grown
better go ' _ round ! _ better go ' _ round ! _ better go ' _ round ! " _
to console my weeping mother .
i never tire to hear you sing .
swinburne , in particular , praises his daring , in that he
and a huge black hulk , that was magnified
their brides on slow - pac'd oxen rode behind ;
ere the final bout is given ,
baith loud an ' lang .
turn down -- to reject ; dismiss .
when a ' the lave 's cheerie ,
lenore at the saracen 's head .
and all at once their breath drew in
shedding her pensive light at intervals
of his kind guidance . from his store of books
like flames by the storm - wind swept ?
when ezry , that 's my sister 's son , came home from furrin parts
my sword it rusteth upon the wall ;
and men brake out of the northern lands ,
none knows what song ;
desire to hear him , so long as he will sing ; even so he
who didst mistrust thy love , who was the best ,
till the long misery had to end or kill :
that 's over - shot , the wisely - stout ,
this well - known chair since last i took ,
the wonder of the ever - healing night ,
bowing my lips unto that stately root
trickles neither blood , nor water ,
" sylvestre ker , you have barely time ; make haste ! "
he ca n't make the rounds , so some women keep true .
yet be of good cõfort , god is ful of grace , & i am good
he jes know'd ev'rything under de sun .
you , now so shaken and so powerless --
of her lost lover 's footsteps , sought that place .
ah , ne'er shall he return ! alone , if night
look homeward through the evening sky ,
through the door we must pass
one fang shone through his lop - sided smile ,
onward still the river sweepeth
with all their aunts , sons , cousins , nieces ,
and the red love of obedience
toward this vice of which we trete
peace and abounding joy ,
for the shadow of tears ?
he notes the center - fielder 's garb , the mudvilles ' shirt of red ;
doreen an ' ole mar flood ' as got a scheme .
the rearing coursers plunged , and then again
and yet it keeps a faded trace
but now she 's gane,--dark , dark an ' drear ,
little one , little one , play your sweet part ,
o that i were where helen lies
of lowly humbles , witħ oute offencion
so she climbed up jacob 's ladder
of all things beautiful , especially
dire was the peril , and the sole success
for i had found day after day too sore ,
eager - hearted , sang an inspired hymn . the sinless man praised god
let all the east adore the sanguine wreathe
or -- in case nothing else in this world you can do--
oh ! my love is very lovely ,
an ' he totes ' is head so pompious high ,
rectorem lyciae ; nec te , mauortia uirgo ,
sudavit inpar praelium .
when red wine had brought red ruin
but these cries can not be answered ;
then , in a moment , flushed to red ,
gigs very fine a livery servant too ,
( ye modern admirers of novels and plays )
to that old camp 's deserted round :
and such in fight the radiant arms he wore .
the herald bears the lyre : intent to play ,
apollodorus says the same . diodorus siculus calls him one of the
when from the portals of that church he came
captains most worthy of commendation ,
all shapes of thought , all hues of heart ,
than see it pluck'd today ;
and the life beyond is fashioned
so as the will does not give up , but hopes
lest herself fast she lay ,
by him created in thir bright degrees ,
never more can foes alarm ;
long ere you trace how deviously it leads ,
whether truant in city er not ,
at mention of my hero 's name !
high as heaven , or deep as hell ,
anacreon had never lost a day on
fresh products of their barren labour fall
nomen ego ausonius , non ultimus arte medendi
so follow hopes and fears .
then let us pray that come it may--
or haply art thou some far - towering pine , --
to slay your sorrow and heal your teen ? "
and " gallop , " gasped joris , " for aix is in sight ! "
shall climacteric be .
should i survey the life to be .
nor here may graver topics rise.--
they wait and pine for what is long denied ,
as fits the holy christmas birth ,
hail'd a strange brig -- corpo di caio mario !
even now , when the knaps ring with rhythms
but prudence calls for some delay ;
in dixie land whar i was born in ,
dans nive flammeolis frigida jura comis ,
your swiftness ? vanquish’d by a female foe ?
the nobles filled the council hall .
interrupted bert resentfully .   " what i mean -- if
to me thy mother and thy sire .
" to swell , and next to child , and thence to fear
we know not such a friend .
but , clapt hodge - podge together , they do n't make a tree .
that lay this very morn upon thy breast ,
bleeds drop by drop , and pants his life away .
from the moss - fretted roof , by nature 's hand
with antique pillars massy proof ,
" alas ! " quoth he , " arcita , cousin mine ,
assist the combat , and patroclus save :
basks in the glare , or stems the tepid wave ,
ráma his royal state should quit
how beautiful such piety !
the rioting grows louder .
he did .   young thomas lent at interest ,
the farmer 's daughter hath soft brown hair
stood frozen stiff ; and suddenly fell on him
washed in the blood of the brave and the blooming ,
now they are swept up
and tom would pair with nancy
and now of rubies bright a vermeil chain ,
on life 's rough ocean luckless starred !
wild spirit , which art moving everywhere ;
clumsy and hard they are ,
if vvithout sense and reason all things then
the sweet , soft freshness that blooms on baby 's limbs -- does
" ' you know that yourself , old man , ' i answered , ' you will gain
life 's flowery fields before us rise ,
livid and quivering , that waited yet
to slaughter by a stripling with a goad ,
can in his swadling bands controul the damned crew .
' tis out on the linden bough he swings--
blest with all man could wish , or prince obtain ,
willie 's awa !
an evil heart to varnish o'er ;
furnished with tile , the fierce artificer
i ' ve gather'd walth o ' weel - won gear ,
which , at last , through the forest broke chill and forlorn ,
home -- and it was saturd'y night -- and he was
o think how sweet to me the freshening sluice !
a spider bathing in the dew at morn ,
there was an old person of blythe ,
let us eat that bird , thus learning
go , and with deathless deeds raise ilion to the skies . '
flouting the sages
fa la !
to slake thy thirst , no less constrained were ,
were task too long ; as long to tell each deed
sabre - cuts of saxon speech ,
ne’er live will i beneath the sky
all beneath the simmer moon ;
correspondence with curll .
the bandage from her brow was taken ,
so i alone , how left disconsolate ,
the men that were wicked to me and mine
now this was jim 's especial foible ,
that men may say , ' this youth surpasses far
and , working it , by chance from umber 's erse
it strengthens what it strikes ; its wholesome dread
" heaven lies about us in our infancy !
had such been cut in phaeton 's time , the god
thro ' all yon starlight keen ,
chant we the story now
as good they had been empty ?
ere law decrees , it 's vengeance on them pour :
with gifts stood honour'd by the sov'reign 's hand .
such a surge of sashes
clothed in attire of crimson hue
but surely they must be mistaken there !
and those bright fireflies wafting in between
like little children in a school .
of perfect blessedness , which to the pure
ravenna hath maintain'd this many a year ,
so to make it look big ,
and she sat gazing with the man she loved
this curious fat - head , ink - fingered , hair - matted ,
drop like a ruby wine .
smooth as adder 's skin the woodwork ,
that one word , as if his soul in that one word he did outpour .
one instant rapidly glanced round ,
which never robin 's whistle stirred ,
i bind the sun 's throne with a burning zone ,
o'erwhelm us .   nay , even now , late though it be ,
was in its strength : and to the curule chairs
that he his name myhte kenne .
still rearing higher that all - devouring head .
despatch their patients to the dead ;
yet still the watchman wakes , and still
called her to sleep and dreams . so with a light
" what fresh treasure are you seeking ? "
but will you hear my dream , for i had one
and could fly to my old home !
o , then vouchsafe me but this loving thought :
be resolute and calm .
to the adored will of god . "
await the day and moment due ,
and at the entrance of a dell
but his mark was set , and his arles given .
let the postillion nature mount , and let
tho ' the loudest spoke also , you heard her alone--
wherein we did another 's burden seek ,
all mischief , and brought evil alike both on the trojans and on
far , far away , upon the bloody plain ,
then hears he a strain ,
ant nimiis torret fervoribus aetherius sol
it can not be ; for were it so
lone , lone , and void of cheer .
his felaw arisippus hyhte ,
' what ails you , child?'--she sobb'd , ' look here ! '
that mix and mingle , to blend as one ;
beneath , and naught discern . "--"i answer not , "
and take this bracelet ring ,
till it went mouldy .
silver - clock !   o silver - clock !   it was only yesterday
sie duftet und weinet und zittert
though red on the glaciers the morning sun shone ,
within the court of heaven , whence i return ,
she would wait any term of years , all time--
with spattering noise rejected : oft they assayed ,
thou , born to sip the lake or spring ,
where , bullet - wounded in the hip and head ,
on the echoing green .
made the sign of the hammer of thor
of my fidelity :
where foaming xanthus laves the lycian land ;
as now i recall it -- is gravely severe ,
thro ' loss of blood than when the trial begun ,
and why should he , who dared to die ,
can wake more fright
" but stroke of sword , and dint of axe ,
from cold estotiland , and south as farr
to such a deep delight ' twould win me
of the borders .
and with him on a snow white pony
of union irresistible , moved on
her neck refulgent , and dishevel'd hair ,
and if the journey 's not too far
an ' there 's that rummy silver grass a - wavin ' in the wind ,
with whom the rosy queen of joy ,
who takest us , the leavings poor of danaan sword , outworn
disport themselves in heaven and spurn their cells ,
the lazy drones from the laborious hive :
in the midst , between her eyebrows -- from her birth a lovely mole ,
a savage man , and one so strong of hand ,
i 'll gie you a little cake .
blazed like an awful sunset . at a stroke ,
a peacock 's plume , there dangled bells
what morning sport to play ,
three long years while kimi dreamed
if you find white girl , you catch her ,
many other beads to stiffen ;
the queen fell to weeping , and sad was each face ,
halesome , wholesome .
ushers bearing the winter 's mace :
the two horsemen , well pleased to have reached it , alighted
it is a thing will soon away ;
then george robertson , till twenty ;
to write the charge which sir john swore ,
the ghost in them of former days--
publisher of the " almanack . "
of trance prolonged unduly some three days
have our songs thus quickly vanished ,
the knives were whetted and -- then came i
oh , take the heart i can not give !
like instrument to plague the sons of men
thy mandates make heroes assemble ,
who set yourselves up as patterns and preachers ,
of metal , sonorous and strong , were turned within their hinges ,
histrionic argonauts ,
pain , let it fall , dropping it into the middle of the host , and
their ladies too have got a way
put pause to life and rhetoric .
on the borders of the ocean ,
if these magnific titles yet remain
inhospitali namque secretus loco
sank as it came , and to its toppling crest
as o'er thy heaths the voice of war .
but that song , so wildly plaintive , palls upon my british ears .
then god might be surprised , and unforeseen
nor what wild tides thy beams control .
death at his own dark door , -- and chuckled
as any expert could ;
“ indulgent still , be more than ever kind :
wearing awhile a windy grace
the hearts of victors never so athirst
scale , with the assaulting host , the rampart 's height ,
bear it with thee as a spell ,
dressed in a style that made my good wife frown ,
age , that bough with snows encumbered .
that loud or privy y - spoken is ,
" pardon , " said morvale ; " and my taunt to shame ,
and discourse ; hence we find embodied in phrenology-
' blame not thyself too much , ' i said , ' nor blame
o , if it wasna lawfu '
it slays the weak , it slays the strong ,
“ the long - lost stars . hence was my lot to see ,
but you may keep it always . "
dim in the parlor 's gloom it showed ,
and as the sound takes its form at the cithern 's neck , and in
i heard the flowers speak ;
lament and rage because of their own beast ,
while here i stand , not only with the sense
revealing to my good costanza , how
are satisfied to close them in the smile
beams of the sun the peaceful sea .
perhaps , while he gnaws my hat in his whim ,
no petty customs nor appearances ;
younglings the country folk have taken from the nest , ere
it 's not fair to the child . it ca n't be helped though :
you may think my life is quiet .
thank heaven for three .   amen !
vulture , whose wings are dull realities ?
it ’ ud a pleased the grate reubens or raffell to call ,
the golden rains are dashed against
in pompous stanzas they their genius raise ,
lovers long betrothed were they :
each had a gravity would make you split ,
a sneerish sort of fellow stood by me ,
beautiful his bark of magic ;
and songs unsung by day--
like a fate .   dare i think like a sympathy too ?
lift not your hands to _ it _ for help -- for it
" these are not ardea 's walls , nor this the town
originally came from that town in thessaly , and that he retired
a form , from some pure region sent .
and a little girl once kept so still
turned to a thread of shaken silver ,
of sights that he hath seen ,
and saw the walls agleam with painted glass ,
in his steep course ? so long he seems to pause
and , in the soul , o'erstrain'd for grace ,
the good news flashes . scarcely could he speak
and music fails me , and my lamp of life
methought last night love in an anger came
while larks with little wing
who laughed till his eyes dropped brine ,
wodrow , in his analecta , has the story of the angel , or other
all we thy seruauntis worthely may come
stream of the enipeus at pharsalia , flows into the peneus . it is
drive to the ships , for pain weigh'd down his soul .
ye to the westward run ,
well ponder every hope and fear
so subtly into the tiny parts thereof ,
saw night and rain in a dead world agrope .
pass the gates of luthany , tread the region elenore . '
clear and high ,
of liking mawworms less than merry maggots !
a brook , like some wild girl at play ,
the time is now propitious , as he guesses ,
palpitated , her hand shook , and we heard
and on the tomb that told their fame
emerge from the all - devouring grave,--
but most by numbers judge a poet 's song ,
" this is true and you must believe it ;
marvellous eaters and smiters : the men of vaiau not least .
each from his navel downward , round the bank . "
" o , ye warriors , name me the ransom ye claim ,
form'd as a crescent , wedg'd in firm array ,
and near a grove of somber pines the shackly farm - house stood ;
the weaker sheltered by the stronger
' twas -- when he had a secret in his care ,
but hold ! see that smile so serene .
pugnandi fieret , aut duri fini ' laboris .
the king , the world ’s imperial chief ,
without resistance , see their city burn .
the onely two of mankinde , but in them
which in those days i heard .
gnatis quinque patrique coniugique
tear out your ' eart an ' good - bye to your lover !
on meadows carpeted with varied hues ,
lay the saving reef below .
thereto did answer gere / of the land of burgundy :
  fancying the dark spaces on the surface of the moon to
how has it thrilled , even to my inmost heart :
o my god , its song of praise
if such the one wheel of the biga was ,
and fell with piercing cries ,
the light was little yet ; his will
for other bodies , promised them by fate .
but still no george replies .
o tell me , does she muse on me ?
surpasses its best imitations ; as truth
gaze on them , till the tears shall dim thy sight ,
embroider'd all with leaves of myrtle .
helpless thou against its bite--
re - enter them with wonder , never fill
and slowly roll along the evening skies ;
appealing to the bolts of heaven ; and while
--left any goods?--asked the salesman .
with so much _ savoir - faire _ , or such
whatever dark may shroud thee
shall know no more the longing
' tis a taste i had never before , my dear john )
the dachshund barking he is crowded out ,
he lay a learner at the saviour 's feet .
of maidens forto telle trowthe ,
no man possessing prizes such as those
rack'd ' twixt two evils ? i see and can not see .
* toller * , quitar .
as daniel , when the haughty king he freed
( why is the window barred ? )
tell them that he lies calmly sleeping
i up an ' cried just like a girl .
the twittering of the women
not the less he loves his haven
mind asked , " have you any news ? "
new change , to her , of everlasting youth ;
was thrilling in its voicing !
shall live ever
and , by the margin of the sea ,
for love did know that their desires were true ;
aureaque excelsam famam super astra locare .
and i 'll come back and comfort thee . "
loosely wind the skeins of wool - yarn ,
of virtue none to sots , i trow ,
each sweet little treasure
so forth in the desire to seek them hies .
that , there came up -- imagine , dear doll , if you can--
them in all directions -- even so did the trojans for a while
before that one might meet with such a sight ! "
to light them , while the western gale
hath motion , and mine eye may be deceived :
far out of sight we seem to glide .
as moral lecturer , the foe
she brings the healing balm of love - sick pain .
for travelled , dusk array .
to the reeds of sable color ,
beneath my appointed sod ;
the fight was raging . they could see hector and all his men , both
they drave him forth
with the bodies of those that fall .
friar lubin stands alone .
they are what i have been .
but those two doughtys cunningly devised
were everywhere .
i 'll dight me in array ;
saturday 's child works hard for its living ,
( the proof of a poet shall be sternly deferr'd till his country
_ poetry and drama _ , and _ the egoist _ for their courteous
pay the bill .
write like me
the respect due to a brave soldier ; but now people look down
return repentant and in high disdain :
oh thou who has lighted the sun ,
come on , all four !
round about us , like stars near fixed poles , they seemed to me as
as if , even yet , thro ' pain and ill ,
aveng'd those piteous gashes , whence the blood
all day , among the crowded air ,
then get thee down ! then get thee down !
some , with stag 's bones rubbed at leathers ,
and half resolved , though he was past his prime ,
no worldly wave my mind can toss ;
never a voice to bid us eschew it :
one steadfast rule -- while shifting souls have laws
betty is churning the milk into butter .
one ingle - nook right warm shall be
and upon ceto and the gorgon brood , ( 20 )
and ripples with dark ecstasies .
what is the flag of england ? ye have but my sun to dare ,
sadly my heart one comfort keeps ,
are vanished long ago ,
just see those handsome fellows , there !
.explicit the temple of glas .
to make it appear ' twas a desp'rate affair . "
what , must i howl in the next world ,
its virtue to my vision knits , and thus
dismiss me hence to ithaca again ,
to his music , plants and flowers
mountain and meadow , then
" to invite the wanderer to the gate ,
perhaps , young men ! our fathers had no nose .
the choicest circles i frequent
tears brightened by the serenade
while sallow autumn fills thy lap with leaves ,
" if to my desire / i ever spouse would find ,
an ' pays him well :
when the corncraik 's voice is mute , as her young begin to flee ,
of gentleness and meek delight ,
if blount despatched himself , he played the man ,
you can not make him out at all ,
where dangers lurk and hate 's at work .
seems vast and meaningless to mortal sense ;
was the poor spray 's , which the flying feet hung to,--
of ráma reft , their lion chief ?
and the muscular strength which it gave to my jaw
thou hast not yet through all the circle turned .
shall be my name . where'er rome 's power extends
their old life as it was ,
and i watched him go , my beautiful boy , and a weary woman was i.
an ' gar him follow to the kirk--
spring and daisies came apace ;
no , thy ambition 's master - piece
thy churched tomb , the pillared vault of morn ;
to men of middle age .
then longer walks , then deeper woods ,
there no mother 's eye is near them ,
yet marna looked not up , but , slowly , spake :
daily is crucified anew :
falleth the sound of feet:--
save one , who look'd thereon with eye severe ,
enough for me that in her name thou ask .
outbraves his storms and peoples half his world .
back to my city triumphing . ”
magnificent he was and mild ,
but you ,
under the still sky 's violet
on the vile coward ! "
my turkies , ducks , and geese ;
no whisper broke the solemn hush ;
his gawsie tail , wi ' upward curl ,
to carry them home again .
there lived brothers three ;
a brighter glory draw ,
three hundred years ago .
all the wild lamenting / of women and of men ,
i dearly love to see ;
wherein they fain would anchor .
each looked its loveliest and said
and i sigh as my heart it wad burst in my breast .
" myself this night about you the sentry 's charge will take .
" ' ha ! ha ! ' he is cry , ' hope to die , how you feel ?
no place to dream , but a place to die,--
and here -- just three leaves from a weeping willow ;
" this stream , and these , forth issuing from its gulf ,
once he saw a fat , stupid ass
they had committed a dire sin against god : on that
beneath biserta 's ruined domes , and nigh
and fast beside the river his horse tied to a tree .
fat herds were feeding on the double marge ,
heaven !
“ of mortal breasts . but myrrha wakeful laid
far sweeter than the greenest laurels sprung
the crested helmet 's peak ; but atreus ' son
farewell , salute , bent knee and hand - kiss ,
queen - regent sounded better than queen - mother ;
from the railroad bridge , with its single span ,
brings but a dove , this but a bended knee ;
others,-well , they served a turn,--
and entrapped him.--it made such a scandal
" i wept thy absence -- o'er and o'er again
of horrible confusion , over which
still further inwardly may go ,
my father ...
there is a firm in yonder town ,
at the feet of harry lee,--
of the state of the land , and th ' enormities in't .
around the guardian prow
prompting their hungers , and they grandly march ,
if god there be , such cruel act
came on disranked ; song 's hand was in his hair ,
no more to range and roam again
with no dancing evolutions , the author of this book
and with fresh hope came on the fresh may - day .
at last i had clarence cut 'em down
against the leader 's prow , her lovely breast
till the smooth temper of my age should be
take me , for the summer closes ,
a magic circle traced,--
in primeval times , a maiden ,
now mayst thyself behold them / and of my faith a witness bear . "
with active labour hand in hand .
if foes , they write , if friends , they read me dead .
ye that have whitened in the dungeon 's darkness ,
for which in tears thy weeping current flows . ]
seem to thank the lord ,
before you prove him , rogue , and proved , forgive .
can with her compare .
the walls of gold entomb us ,
we heard the gathering tempest roar !
fury of the fight was not yet over , for the trojans were not
climbed and crowded through the smoke - flue .
her eyes closed , and her arms went out again .
i never again shall tell you what i think .
nests in and makes an audible mouth of musk
literature for more than a century following stands luis
he puts that faded scrap before
into this cursed world a woeful race ,
waters , without th ' expense of arms or breath ,
why strikes he not , the foremost one ,
had flushed mine eyes and set them on the flow ,
shall in his seed be blessed ; by that seed
i took her into our tapestry ha ' ,
my friend much respected , ' tis hardly the thing
the rest they purchased at their proper cost ,
an ' her stomach , it jes ' fail her .
this to affirm , ev'n from deep judgment based
chanting , through mystic symbollings of flame ,
yet more must i , that therein see far more
vainly that ray of brightness from above ,
rats squeak in this ancient barn
father on high , hear thou my cry,--
fitful it shines and changes ever ,
there 's a lass sits greetin ' ben the hoose at hame ,
though the wind hath fallen , they drift along ,
not with his trumpet only , but his spear .
save that a paltry cow to her refus'd ,
all summer , hal!--my peerless kate !
of pity and of piety
lord of the universe ! what beautiful , what bold ,
ever , evermore the while in a slow silence she kept smiling ,
and wish my friend as sound a sleep
when maisterie comes , the lord of love anon
and hopes that are all dew - kissed ;
arter cipherin ' plaguy smart ,
come , sleep ; o sleep ! the certain knot of peace ,
by an arsenal gray as the rain ...
thou hast thy secret hidden from the light :
totters the moon , and blushes
some men , like french , display much dash ;
politely bowed , took wing , and flew away ;
just to dream of sabre 's flash
even thus below , pimps , flatterers , men of straw ,
three months , and then the oxford schools ;
the bank , on each side bending equally ,
i 'm proud ; but i wish -- i could fix up a dish
they aim at the mistaken crests , from high ;
be as god 's thunder , and your heart one blaze--
an ' them as sot out on the fence an ' gossiped all the while ,
nor only groan and lamentation fly
where solitude , mild , modest power ,
or in one common fate with us be join'd . '
your infant _ peas _ to asparagus prefer ;
but satisfied with this , his golden days
down the green valleys languidly
' twas hard .   you can not understand . . .
( whose presence no member had noticed before )
a smart young seaman he was getting to be . "
so silent is the world to - night
the next day , as the picture shows ,
driving her sister anna into exile . in the phœnician language the
two skilful leeches , aesculapius ' sons .
answer made the leaning birch - tree ,
he seeks them headlong , and is seen no more .
read so , dear heart ; nay , rather white - souled one ,
and the rain - shower and the snow - storm ,
then gilbert reached for his rifle true
as i too paused , and both ways tried
i hold you fast , your hurrying breath ,
i was unarm'd ; but if in steel ,
list lincoln 's call , then freemen , all
in strong prisoun that he was leid
to ride , but sleipner , odin 's horse , alone .
the sons of men . but , o good god !
and here you see flirting
for settin ' there and makin ' such a break .
seen any boldness -- impropriety ?
the cherche is brent , the priest is slain ,
with diamonds and perfumes
have i not wept to know myself so weak
the priests with hooves , the lovers with horns ,
and , from his bending shoulder , decent hung
on many a wharf and quay .
" and i am glad that he has lived thus long ,
of one sad nightingale .
and tomlinson looked down and down , and saw beneath his feet
or wherefore should i kame my hair ?
graduating godward ever ,
( sir midriff bolus was his name , )
i charge thee by the years gone by ,
in wandering ways and did not find -
" with william , hell a heaven could be ,
while ocean liners blow their whistle on the canal !
and her soiled and tattered garments
two years was long !   she loved her father well ,
jim can rally , and jim can ride . "
reaping no more than they sow
or whether laws be wrong ;
sometimes the spirits made mistakes ,
you , wha ken hardly verse frae prose ,
at hame , a - fiel ' , at work , or leisure ,
those lulling waters where he lay ,
of every heart on earth infixes deep its restless twists :
has touched thee -- and a spirit 's hand :
here with the sweet pierides .
intently listened gunther , / and though he naught could see ,
has the town on her shoulders .   whatever may be
and i the happy country swain ,
as in that moment ; nor through haste dar'd i
and as they walked in , side by side , each knew
foulbed ! and she fell :   the blow clove two .
the free - born landsmen rous'd , complain , and cry .
corinthian territory , which was infested by a wild boar of
and keep each precedent , however small ,
it brings no real homily , we sigh ,
his wayward errors , who thus early died ;
‘ he robbed me and my fellows both
drinking , drinking all alone
and he no consolation
and destroyed under the partial and iniquitous administration of
shutting with careful fingers and benign ,
its neck was slender , and its mouth was wide ,
when to the gallows he was led ,
he only heard , still as he stood
with large and sinewy hands ,
not one had leave to kill or wound--
nauþ{er } to cout ne to kerue , w{i}t{h } knyf ne wyth egge ,
we must ) , with " what we must we may . "
then noemon , son of phromius , answered him saying : ' i gave
his meditating eye .
by god 's gold afternoon ! peace ye shall have ;
and the kimmers o ' largo ,
the powers of darkness bound .   thou , at the sight
“ no , no , to give is not my way . ”
but it really is surprisin ' what a lot of love ' twill hold ;
was it not better so to lie ?
to form aloft a social row
the sob and ripple of the seas ,
her visions and those we have seen,--
for strong and subtle are thy foes within .
thy duties promptly to attend ,
they walk no longer with a stumbler blind ,
quod pandarus , ` and it your wille be
such he appear'd ; then downward bent his eyes ,
whoever rideth thither , death has he close at hand . "
fafaia , as start from star .
by his kind endeavours existence to lose .
your sympathy ? i crave your high respect ?
he is the challenger . if such his choice ,
in every scene his active genius shined :
" ich halte diesen drang vergebens auf ,
come to my longing arms , my lovely care !
the blatant cacophonies of war ,
they heap his altar which they can not hide ,
what his soul shall be granted      of good or evil--
who says that life is sorrowful ? o life so glad , so fleet !
and they lace on good helms sarragucese ;
turn night into hellish day ,
my eyes are searching , though they may not see ;
else i should here , in cunning phrase , display ,
we used to buy these flowers ,
who chased by swift orlando scours the shore .
júpiter torna , como suele , rico :
to doubt the frankness of her flippancy .
and then a fortress old
our parting was fu ' tender ;
and the hard wave o'erwhelm'd him as ' t was dash'd
lord jesus christ , thou light of light ;
and hearing drunken peasants glad carouse !
or live in sea , or aire , beast , fish , and fowle .
thou , whose exterior semblance doth belie
with many beanes or peason put within ,
and the tall poplar 's silver leaves are wet ,
if i might build a palace , fair
si vero est unctum qui recte ponere possit
rollánd turns back , and searching through the field ,
" lords and barons , " charles the king doth speak ,
in knowledge , as the gods who all things know ;
she won , and cupid blind did rise .
from jove in days of old . what says report
fair rafael , his holy breath
i will not fall ! i will not ; thou dost lie !
could not contain -- ye gods ! that give to men
shared by child and bird and flower .
sweet consolation to assuage her heart ;
vvhen angry most he seem'd and most severe ,
or , perhaps , he had thought he had much rather not .
from marking them , or ere her words began ,
along the rugged stony pass ,
and turning on a valiant warrior huge ,
ca n't go in .
in the same furious and tempestuous mood
and thro ' the grass the spider weaves
himself by his piteous cries and by frankincense , with
could kneel and hail the virgin and believe ! "
and the evil army shouted :
lead me through an april - shower
that ever thou
the flowers , the song - birds , awaking--
he makes a pretty playfellow for any little child ;
and wood and cave the mighty noise return ;
i shall be very proud and great .
and at length upon the third day ,
with placid soul he softly spoke :
ye other few who have the neck uplifted
i stood not singly , nor without just cause
men touch them , and change in a trice
thy morris - dance , thy whitsun - ale ,
to plead for life -- to justify a death--
my roistering friends impeached your fit ,
those pretty wrongs that liberty commits ,
the adversarie serpent , and bring back
he has been by us deluded .
for i am of the tribe of ben asra , who die when they love .
are your haunting ghosts to - night .
hyp .        ' t is a notable old town ,
and were the painted rosebuds
angry with ale ;      it shall end his life ,
enfold in the serene delight
drove through the thickest of the embattled plains
mid victories born , victoria is her name ,
of union absolute , which , many a time ,
long through thy weary crowds i roam ;
rolled his vessel to the water ,
not a single word !
walking the dim corridor ;
but , with a smile and words of hope , gives zest
transferat ut proprias aliena in crimina culpas . "
for tho ' , by some unlucky miss ,
till the high god behold it from beyond ,
for thogh sche bothe se and hiere ,
this said , her shallop drove she gainst the sand ,
the towers i built had heard of me --
said he had been a traveller .
and spread a gloom o'er every british heart ;
than he hadde erst non of that wele y - knowe ? "
turn to thy slumber , golden , deep ,
that made my inmost heart so glad ,
where is no want of nourishment to feed ? "
head and shoulders above the wave ,
the whyles the boyes run up and downe the street ,
when they reach'd the hall - door , and the charger stood near ;
we ’ll then forget
still vaunt of thrones and victory to the rest;--
and the great arms of the warrior no more for war availed .
about his temples , drowned his narrow head ,
the weaving that everyone knows .
ergyrwayw gwrys gochwys yn rheid ,
twenty score paces betwene .
why i am silent , and my lute unstrung ;
there must be poison in a man 's distress
what we were once together , even yet
who , wander'd from his track , thinks every step
painted stations whistle by .
he brought the news of litwa 's victories !
full purple is his state !
these ideas are fainter , quainter
the weapon bright emboss'd . now sank the sun ,
upon culloden 's field .
dear god ! when my turn comes ,
with these foreboding words restrains their hate :
of sorrow and regret ,
that man i love ! who , dwelling quiet - eyed,[fn#25 ]
  [ byron and hobhouse sailed from falmouth , july 2 , 1809 ; reached
to where his slighted garden lay ;
or on more vile allowance .   mortal flesh
there with these
frog to the pool , rejoicing , hopped ;
all the lightness of the birch - tree ,
mourn , little harebells o'er the lea ;
the souls did from their bodies fly--
waves her coach , and waves her pillow .
yet fell ; remember , and fear to transgress .
she made a record of her life , and wrote
beneath his helmet , nods upon his breast ;
where the purple mullet and gold - fish rove ;
the unconquerable strength of love ;
therefore i 'll make don juan leave the ship soon ,
he seems the breath of a celestial clime !
" dem dat am not got a cent--
the glossy starlings seldom stop
than the authority of his hiring , that 's
the hindrance lies
for , choosing out the best of lycia 's sons ,
all beneath yon flowery rocks .
by the fallen tree was standing ,
but all the while , trade did n't mend
he was thinking , as he sat there ,
that ech of hem scholde other clothe .
i have loved money , even while i knew
scarlet screamed out above the battered gold
now look down from this height , and see how beauteous before us
mark'st thou the firm , yet active stride ,
a fisher or a hunter there ,
the vengeance due to all her wrongs
while here i sojourn'd , oft i heard the fame
yet are resolved to stand or fall ,
but if thou pity him , and deem it good ,
for which both heaven and earth shall high extol
till the sea heave and groan ,
who never had more than a penny ;
indeed and very dreadful was the wreck !
but virtue to pursue and knowledge high .
the ceaseless tumbling of the billows grey ,
bosom of silence , mouth that sates the sense ,
on his head were plumes of swan 's down ,
in the everlasting dance
my lighter verse , and my low notes to raise ,
oft of a pleasant summer morn
" therefore has pohyola 's hostess
not while my hands are free , my body quick
gin a body kiss a body--
much better than the flower - row
and no one sees and no one knows
of every beauty work with quicker force ,
issued in this country ; fully equal to the english , of which they
when the boys came out to play ,
into the forest , with himself communing
has risen ?   adieu :   content are we !
into harness by cupid .   the man mad with drink ,
an ' lost ' is head an ' bu'st into flower
i would call to the stars
school - boy , he is earning money ; he takes on the airs of a
why else is the same styled sharon 's rose ?
chansons of france , scotch tunes , and o'er the rest ,
as crisp and young as these ? they 've just the tang
their conduct was exceedingly well - bred ,
faith fails ;
rev . robert aris willmott . with english and american additions .
sweet orange grove , the fairest of the isle ,
white - hot of soul , white - chaste of mien ,
' twas a beautiful young woman ,
song . the sentiments borrowed from shakespeare
and was received , he so discreetly wrought ,
--is far more sweet to me .   and here are other
_ oh , in sevin long years i 'll make a wow ,
magnaque cum magno veniet tritura calore(348 ) .
i had melodied years ago .
where was the well , nor in what land it lay .
that searched with lightning secrets hidden
her april - scented hair .
but when the rutuli were gone , at such a word of pride
lund ’s excursion to windermere .
on ancient massiveness behind -
he did n't shake his coat and make
of ruddy morn , gray changed through pink to white .
but to hack a man who 's dead is what oi called extramely base .
melanthius lit the fire , and set a seat covered with sheep skins
to whom ulysses , ever - wise , replied .
the sophist smiles , the greedy mouths and hands ,
back with a strangle of tears :
the duck - billed paradox .
regard my words , sweet love , and name
flash in pride when thou art by !
but if to moisture , let the oil
in our sleeves full well we knew ,
“ o look , our hero , wo nt to ride
peace at night to sweeten life ,
antiquarians must rely for very much of ancient architectural
“ lakshmaṇ and i through forest shade
or that sche lawghe , or that sche loure ,
uns ist in alten maeren    wunders vil geseit
with feet like pearls ,
cowslips then , and harebells blue ,
does the sheath of velvet cover the claw ?
" dashes at life , " by n. p. willis . the life of mr . willis is too
he heav'd them on the fire
the old child 's olympus
roar down uncheck'd ; and serpents shaped of mist
to thole the winter 's sleety dribble ,
" there 's no one i knows on would come so late ,
how far , alas ! from aught divine ,
he roosed my een , sae bonnie blue ,
mezentius fix'd his foot upon his breast ,
i am a feeble glimmering spark
o'er thymy hill , and thro ' illumin'd glade ,
the other ye behold , who for his cheek
( hark to the thrush 's trilling ) .
that evere in al this world he syh :
he 'd miss me from the darling 's side !
in the life to come that we meet once more !
of countless dead , thou mighty alchemist ,
fretting their margin for evermore .
sailed across the seas of pohya ,
whereby you thinke some other wrot to try
in a golden shoure into hir to discende
for men to take their exits ; and ' tis found
hurl me despairing to annihilation !
" that we , who in the forest dwell ,
i sit an ' see .
to light up nature 's face again ,
the rain again like a vague pain arose
upon his good staff resting ,
till thy deft mind invents me happiness . '
once with this kinsman , ah so long ago ,
some so chilly
saint praxed at his sermon on the mount ,
ther 's somethin' i 'd like ter speak about
shrewdly at stukeley , twinkled once at me ,
your ' eart ?   you ' aven't none . . . .
none could hear him at the other .
i 've sought in many , found in none ! '
gay with the flowering thorn and vermeil rose :
but in the crowd if eye encounter'd eye ,
and so it falls with that dull sound
in the dreadful days of shah - shah ,
these piled in many heaps he next surveyed ;
through all the wide - spread veins of endless good .
so silently and fast ,
and turned the turtles off their legs .
of that craftsmaster 's cruel guile had many bade beware
rumble like the peals of thunder ,
rover with me used to go
flew o'er me and my dearie ;
was the spot where last he rested pleasant as an old - world lea ?
' is it , ' exclaim'd gulbeyaz , ' as you say ?
and see what you may see . "
he held his slaves ; yet kept the while
gladstone , and others . there was some excuse for the error
with his mittens torn and tattered ,
and there is rued the stratagem , that troy
or he shall keep the word , which he engaged .
or mite - horn shavings , filings , scrapings ,
draw me but first , and after thee i 'll run
taman is one and greater than all gods :
mothers have clasped with joy the new - born babe .
" on the crags of the mountains _ hur _ living _ hur _ seeks ,
since thou gavest me existence ,
" od ! hear our gudewife , she wad fain save your life ;
come away , come away
and many a private soldier ,
descries beyond the abyss of night
for many a hero , dead , who might have claim'd
the wall , our late inviolable bound ,
but -- if the dead can help it most--
love which adores , and honour which aspires--
_ nesciensque scienter _ , as writers express it ,
feelings , and thoughts , and knowledge came again .
all pain but pity : thus the lone voice spake :
better never to be blest
like hosts of speechless spectres thronging come
they bleed -- we weep ,
hear , as of old ! thou gav’st , at thetis ’ prayer ,
beeath neeght an ' day ;
each hungry , holy soul is fed !
i 'm sure , my dear husband , our friends will attest
worse than the weak assaults of steel ,
all side in parties , and begin th ' attack ;
now in darkness and billows , he sweeps from my sight :
in a costume very simple and white ;
my very soul from out my brow ;
bursts on his sight , boundless and bright as noon ;
i find no war in nature , though the wild
the man how blest , who , sick of gaudy scenes ,
that there she sits , a shape of air ,
the airy streamers form the downward line ;
o'er his still course , nor tanais far remote
to find , arriv'd too late;--“but here , ” they cry,--
beatrice.--the glory of the blessed virgin .
and swore that ne’er the bolt which he
with gold and diamond bright as flame ,
and merlin called it " the siege perilous , "
hammer it upon thine anvil ,
this day is but the twelfth , since , sorely tried
when , duller than our dulness ,
" ruediger requital / must make to - day with life
half - strangled in the changing webs of cloud
from the cool air mid showers of jessamine
the green , bright grass of childhood bring to me ,
she 's been embalmed inside and oot--
to favour , warn and help them , prayed the dame ;
she flung behind her as she went
at all who marry in churches ,
with long grass under foot ,
and die in rome .   the very weeds , that grow
a twanging sound!--and on its errand sped
the spiritual life of all ,
varenna with its white cascade .
and faith confirm his strongest faith in love .         g.
and now my song is ended ,
that she treated anything like fear with feelings of disdain .
watched , cloud by cloud , her huge armadas grow ,
such ( if the judgment i have form'd be true )
que she ne feux bas see ;
to work my mind , when body 's work 's expired :
looked for the coming that might not be !
such was the pagan 's fury , such his cry .
" war ! and that to a woman without gold-- "
on nature 's face in every clime--
and his coach and four bays were to --n -- s -- n lost !
but who are now as wise as they
and with new numbers grace the god of verse . "
the imperial race of everlasting rome .
to allay their thirst and fever ,
against his maker ; no decree of mine
among her loose locks as she leaned o'er her sewing ,
his chestnut steed with four white feet ,
but only crave
you 'll hear the wild birds singin ' beneath a brighter sky ,
my blessin ' and my pride :
“ and all the people roam through every wood ,
and brought their boasting valour to an end .
dear little bird of the wood ?
of ferns and grass and moss ;
the heart of rachel , for her children crying ,
a dismal universal hiss , the sound
ez erlong de road i go ,
might serve some use or other .
all full of flowers , though hid from sight .
gaze down upon it though it sicken thee .
charles lamb wrote to wordsworth in 1815 , " your _ power of music _
pays loyalty exulting , by which all
comparison with those from the german is at present
she took great care to keep the girls away ,
be tasted ere it work ; the last exceeding
and across the heaths of pohja ,
water brought them from the brooklet ,
fell destroyer of my people . "
on this earth -- and _ dearer _ , even ,
ah , love is good for little .
that dims her sight with unshed tears ?
and bends the gallant mast , my boys ,
tho ' it was lined with softest down .
surmising well he of his case has heard :
now not , though sin , not time , first wraught the change ,
their souls through june were all in tune ,
at his foreseen approach already quake
roseleaves dead ere autumn sicken .
then the son of peleus brought out the spear , helmet and shield
and go even now to bethlehem , and spy
and i tried her dream to trace .
corners .
tyrants rob as well as reign--
drift through the purple of the wedded sea
with moonlight and with tears .
fallen and perished , shalt possess the land . "
the fated sees , knows , hears them -- all too late . "
even as a scarlet cranberry ,
to the hard head haled he .
paine , and ingersoll , subserve the cause of christ by shattering
lurks a cruel bee , that stings .
made , unavailingly on the woman that we have loved , the emotion
by the light of the leaping fire :
elephants have lovely eyes ,
even in anguish beautiful;--such is the empery
to blood and rapine .   here they wail aloud
their forces .
the sun was low and crimson - faced
i go my way and i do my part
the cry of the love - hurt ,
following their noses , because it was the rule ;
i will wake my harp when the shades of even
when to my place of rest ,
straying far and free .
and this is what she tries to make me hear ,
good milk , for the ewes yield all the year round . but while i
but be not a terror ,
it seems that he before his eyes had plast
of those with which his haidee 's bosom bounded ?
would rest upon his lip ) , and finally they gave each other names
dywallaw di fenestr gan foddhaed ,
o wha will i get but tam glen !
and may rake among the lake - reeds ,
with her grey henchman , death .
nec par nec impar , qui trochaeus dicitur . '
though ireland be but a land of saints ,
of a face that is tender and true ;
doubt assisted by the labours of those of their predecessor whom
some she slew with a kick , some she scrunched with a stick ,
too sensual else , too unrefined ,
o saints , had i but lost my earing corn
it is it question , perhaps , whether lovelace intended by the
with their faint moan ;
and once i drew my blades , my boys , upon the famed barcoo ,
was now to learn that heaven , though slow to wrath ,
my shoulders bowed with weariness unguessed ;
hung was a sweet - scented garland , new twined by the hands of
but the wolf ! and it frightened him dreadfully .
who have each other dear at heart ,
and think of the feet
short was his date ! by dreadful ajax slain ,
i feel him fluttering in my breast .
if her mother weep ?
while , with my precious folio ,
we can make our lives sublime,--
so gentle and polite he was , just like a man of peace ,
thut the weakes ' place mus ' stan ' the strain ;
came certain of them , always with regard
till the heat of the noonday sun is o'er .
indeed they do not deem her as a friend .
the bowlder , in the torrent 's course
forgetting i was strong .
for objects worthy of the sentiment .
and one there is among them ,
thou hast forgotten me ;
the naked levels till they tire ,
the lion of england no more
and crystalline as rays of light
then nisus spake : " if such great gifts are toward for beaten men ,
but the engineer looked down ,
give to each a water - basin ,
tell me of your strange adventures ,
crimes are not punish'd 'cause they 're crimes ,
i 've no ambition to enact the spy
and patience learned of mournful days ,
must nations be in the same furnace cast ,
lucy simpkins , _ at bremhill _ .
from many a rocky leitrim height
" amidst a scene of such a cast ,
how often have i hail'd thee !
men shal reioysen of a greet empryse
from his chin his speech i 'll sever ,
is worthy thee ; the duty of the brave .
the cracked veranda with a tipsy lean .
on the ' other hand already ceuta past .
each winding shore for thee , alonzo , mourns ,
in fastening their outer garments with hooks and eyes ?
as he shall know , well , dearly know .
leave the slip - panels down , it wo n’t matter much now ,
dependence made a thing for winds to blast ,
" if of them lived none other / but ute 's sons alone ,
and xanthus ' stream , and delos sees , his mother 's isle once more ;
a soft and dim cerulean hue ,
the inhabitants , through all the wasted land ;
veronikew , the snowy river horse .
mouynge theyr bodyes in synes full of shame
i sing thy birth , o jesu !
barnice 's lonely , darkened cottage ,
that through the field the grass so green and fine
whose ready will ne'er halts in doing good ,
on one foot , as usual , cradled ,
wainamoinen , famous minstrel ,
and sticky gum oozed from the bark of trees ,
easily rolling so as scarce to mar
i feed a flame within , which so torments me
at brother 's , sister 's childish plays ?
while great wars above them hurled .
and travelled to your land of arcady .
which his ignorance could not fathom .
and thank the morning for the light it brings ,
and talks so very loud ,
chesterton , the prose - paradoxer , is a delightful product of a
virgin , dost ask what whiter than that white
let doleful tidings greet his mother ’s ear ,
truly rejoiced , you may guess , to escape from republican terrors ;
load again , rifleman , keep your hand in ! "
the woodchucks , askulk in their caverns ,
my slumb'ring heart thrilled through and through and stirred
" unde loquaces
with trills as crystal - clear
hold sacred this sign .      on me the son of god
as burst the gates of our earth - moulded senses ,
and steeds he gives and guides he gives ,
i shall hold her in my happy arms for hours .
making the countenance a masque of rest ,
is shriller and higher . #
and built - in cases for the books ,
and mixed with pastoral accents , rude but clear
whence she to me : " in those desires of mine
in the warm air of the spring--
columbus addresses queen isabella
the vánar chief put forth his power ,
then the smiling pau - puk - keewis
i like it not at all ,
first she sank , and then she swam ,
and babble of her pastime!--on , dread power !
the sounding forest ' fluctuates ' in the storm ,
a world from utter loss , and hast been found
had we but nobler instruments . "
the arch - discomforter might well have smiled
she gave me a perfumed cigarette ,
but one there was who did n't care ,
i dreamed that somewhere in the shadowy place ,
stand by the flag ! its stars , like meteors gleaming ,
not mine be the hand to withhold you the golden to - day ,
nay :   hushed , hushed , hushed you are for me !
together , but without uniting .
commenced . for , in a dialogue written by bryskett , as mr malone
of coming time my only joy !
so that if thou said'st no ,
he sails to crush his country 's foes ,
or else they 'll overhear thee ! "
and then their mother calls , and all around
the spirit , glorious and serene ,
but , though he heaves with might and main ,
and eden trembled as he fell ,
as best i might , that this great horror fall
to some sweet soul beyond the central skies
we entered in , and waited , fifty there
which only a born devil can enjoy .
" right hearty were your welcome / from me and brother mine ,
as the storms the forests tear ,
' we must be near some place of man 's abode;--
with your stomach big and red ,
that done , despitefully i mean to bear thee
see , brave hearts go down the hill ,
_ tansy _ , a cake made of eggs , cream , and herbs .
sweet is the firbloome , but his braunches rough * ;
now emeralds of golden green
thought till she sank into a slumber , and lay on her bed bereft
and quickly with the chariot sped
he 's sin gat eppie sim wi ' wean ,
and the herrings the coster sells ;
is with tresor so full begon ,
such art thou to thy selfe .   while others dream
so that i do approve what forth emerged ;
the gnawing of remorse , the longing vain
but let them read , and solve me , if they can ,
how i squared the broken pitcher ,
her hands for me , make love to her in short
tradesman in the city of chichester , i think a hatter ; and being
a delicate fragrance about it lingers ,
he rather would mar than resolve to diminish it ,
its golden wings , like glory 's flame ,
but a short time passed thereafter ,
by any policie it can essay .
the tired midsummer blooms !
the miser who wakes in a fright for his pelf ,
i hail thee , summer , who art glorious ,
with tents i see his mountain spread ,
yet still in mind i keep ,
by his long and scraggy scruff .
the mountains ; where the glens are dry
also some other ar callyd phesicians good
from john wilbye 's _ first set of english madrigals _ , 1598 .
he heard his father 's voice from the terrace below
ducks to die , ducks to die ;
so from the inmost cavern , thalaba
near is another crag that yields a path .
" i can find of words a hundred
i went in wishing anyone else
risit amor pallamque meam pictosque cothurnos
by land i speed , and , should dark fate prevent ,
who give themselves for others all their years
or cot to call his own ,
and let that wine be all for me !
the hosts of giant warriors sped
and bishop of gold !
and ne’er wilt thou bear thy lord an heir ,
there as the mother sits all day ,
the ice was all around :
in ev'ry alehouse too they 're found .
puts on the semblance here of sorrowing .
song , " ' tis said that
then sez the driver 's brother , an ' ' is words was very plain ,
to cast the shadow of a care
when there 's skirt around to skite to .
and haled them down from the sky !
against the motions of the heav'n , that roll'd
in the depths of the purple sea ;
regardless of the bliss wherein hee sat
we walk'd by grassmere shore ;
if aught appear of which they are afraid ,
there to abide with thee , their queen ,
of haw and dogwood in the spring again ;
past our reach ; and in , the flowers
one cordial in this melancholy vale ,
he asked to know her worry , / as he her weeping saw .
at the top o ' honour 's tree a ' .
and those lithe limbs i used to prize
tapped at the pane for me .
des ter hide erwhile ;
ah ! how i melt with pity , when i spy
rosy day dons the garb of a penitent fair ;
to destroy the lapland corn - fields ,
i turned away miserable , bitter with myself . and all the while i
and to and fro the tidings run ,
our first and last arcadia .
nor sheep and butting kids tread down the flowers ,
where cushioned walls rise up between
ere we take the change and chances
and have i not with roses , dear ,
the tenderness of love .
once more of things , that held my thought suspense ,
the covey well nigh in that instant , rends
all inwrought with beads of wampum ;
i bring the gift of hope !
which was enough for tom and me
a little lad just back from play --
blue , that catch the early light , of ages yet to be .
i will wake my harp when the shades of even ,
when purged of its various abuses
and a meaning in her eyes ?
she opened fire within the mile--
the angels , most heedful ,
the magistrates and ministers , and seeking
gathering seed for the hungry brood .
what is't to me ,
for the ship that caused his pain .
for us too comes the evening -- and the hour .
we will make of these strings a sweet lute that
would not obey him , for fate lured them to their fall . diomed son
it 's better than all to sleep .
the water - demon 's hate shall nerve thine arm . "
then fled the rustic multitude , and we
" inglorious argives ! to your race a shame ,
and as a rainbow is an arch
" the rebel tribes shall quake with fears ,
ere the beer , in casks imprisoned ,
that you are engaged , at the present moment ,
who rise , instructed by his ghost ,
ere thou hast sailed them through . "
in the mem'ries that throng ,
just as i was , unjust toward myself .
but , if i anger love , whose prayer shall save
young friends , i invite you--
whan that sche for so foul a vice
bere wytnes of this day
of lustful apperence , to sing , to dance ,
by the rosy cliffs of devon , on a green hill 's crest ,
you , in your solitude standing , lofty and lonely ,
harper of heaven ( 1948 )        | autobiography .
and princely giver , who hast brought the gold
grudge at bendigo .
it flits and whirls and pipes and skirls ,
but i 'm driving you forth , and forever and aye ,
hear me and let me speak .
to see no skies above , no ground below ,
o , sure are coming nigh our hills the auspices foretold ,
the children , though tired with their travelling , found
above all princes born of human seed :
that the time may pass more gayly ,
fayre venice , flower of the last worlds delight ;
and once more a happy , careless boy , in memory i stray
to beautify thy hills , i knew
drowned by a drum 's stern beats;--
dipping their bills before they sing--
they halted at a low - browed porch ,
to serve and not to fail -- she glanced at this
' the time has come , as i suspect ,
with all bourke cockran 's love of fact ;
and it was all a dream .   o sleep , sweet sleep
and lakes and running streams the waters fill ;
with the coming and going
that peter and that paul , who for this vineyard
and thought his very e'en enriched :
painful marks of want and care ,
then did the ample marge
raghu ’s illustrious son , whose sway
_ eve . _                     o pathetic christ ,
as doth the billow there upon charybdis ,
in fair mycenae ; midmost of whose day
when thus my guide : " no more his bed he leaves ,
when i shall lie below them ,
bidding him gaze with rapture or with dread
_ parnassian _ groves , and _ twick’nam _ fountains , say ,
seemed charm to be .
on record .
to this dull cage who take their flight ,
those who have children , what more agreeable or delightful
for the happy , youthful days
you clutched this larch .
found all assembled and one sheep over ,
el niño divino ,
drunk with the blood of those that loved thee best ;
by man , the master , but i remain
all round them shouted the everlasting sea ,
feet of the rain .
to be roaming through the heather ;
in them then , in them then ?
sharpened in silver by one chance breeze is the olive 's grey ;
and soon you will slumber most sweetly .
bowed all together to the holy west ,
but also are they in their number less ,
so look'd the ship that bore away
  from " along the way , " copyright 1879 by mary mapes dodge ,
on bold sir hagen she bestow’d ,
of suffering for a fallen race !
beneath us stretched the valley ,
the oranges , and lemons too ,
edmund has a sacred charge ,
innumerable leaves , each like the other ,
something inspires the only cow of late
delicacie and drunkeschipe ,
the noble menelaus ' wrath to meet .
the feeling of the turf beneath my feet ,
sense went home to bed ;
all worth we own , or know:--
as near to the gates of the city he rode ,
that thus , condemn'd , ye to my caves approach ? "
all thy wants are well supplied .
looked on the wondrous sight .
memorial , where the might of gabriel fought ,
for i fell asleep , and dreamt three hundred ,
vault of brilliant heaven is naught . then give thyself
and with all that desire must leave undone ,
a buggy brought a stranger to the west - o'-sunday run ;
and should you need nor heart nor hands
of this and that ,
and , wordless , so greets heaven for his success .
imagining fell down , soon as a light , greater by far than that to
and journey over countless seas
the blood of abel was a thing , ii . 235 .
where angels view the father 's light ,
unmov'd by summer - flowers and cloudless skies ,
we 'll deck the lofty pole at home .
o'er the waters to the vessel ;
a granite rock in the mountain side
which grew in suffering , when it overspread
as in that holiest night
" and when will ye come back frae roamin ' ,
years passed thee withering in the red
green as the tender leaves but newly born ,
from far ascania 's lake , with phorcys join'd ,
looks upon each impious kiss .
the yankees raised a cheer --
on a day when yellow birds
and natheles the king hath bede
strange are the ways of men ,
near and yet hidden from the great high - road ,
my lands and all my tenements ?
we children are here in the hall all alone ,
and time has changed my clustering hair ,
nor lightning flash , nor hurricane--
whence they doe still behold the glorious face
and bound thee to her with a double vow,--
with hungry looks and sickly mien ,
now shake , out thy fruitful breast , the seeds
cheer , cheer thy dogs into the brake ,
permit me--'tis a panorama ,
unto this worthi yonge king
cor . phyllida , my true love , is it she ?
shah - nameh are from champeon 's translation . ]
i am less than a speck of dust on the wing of a moth
i 've fished with patent bait ,
and the young men played together
will meet you with grim spectre - faces .
she views the shades of night descend ,
and enters upon an era of marvelous productiveness . for four
agamemnon chiefly -- if my battle - toil
slowly and sadly we laid him down ,
old man overcome with wine and carrying a gourd of
likest she seemd , pomona when she fled
the grass grew proud beneath her feet ,
speaking , or mute , all comeliness and grace
after it had with much ado sustain'd
that stopping old custom wakes my spleen :
of every noble warrior and every lady free .
in the pomp of his baptism
wakes the nerves to laugh again ,
through airy paths and sad abodes ,
“ lady , at length my task is done ,
by the hand of the stranger , the wolf in the fold ,
our fields rejoice , our mountains ring ,
the zest and ardour of the eager bar ;
at once they saw before , the setting sun ;
how they snort and how they blow ! " ]
full grown , and ripened from eternity--
but cold and dead by the hidden log
todos se salieron .
in wide the world 's weal ; rare gold , bold steel , bare
look down , and love my love alway ;
for it turns and it twists and it wanders about
thee , wretch ! no lisping babe shall name ,
you are more tired of victory ,
evident he took no note of an open cellar - way that
which did n't make me pretty .   and he was so nice ,
the bottom of a ship of burthen spreads ,
ah , how kausalyá will rejoice
  { 475 } see the above - cited romuald of salerno . in a second sermon
in feature , form , an ' claes ;
an earthquake had lived here a year or so ,
black 's the night , and how you shrink !
tenements uncouth i was fain to house in ;
scann'd every charm , and peerless found the whole ,
and he thought : " it is most truly
against desire do well if i ask not . "
of our meeting later were rightly interpreted . "
then let him chuse a damsel young and fair ,
by the cool stream she gather'd them ,
though yet there lived no proof , nor yet was heard
rejoice we are allied
the steadfast beauty of her eyes is balm ,
the nymph arose : he left them to their joy ,
behold that holy man who , strong in faith ,
to know her wisdom 's mother , and that we
bearing a message full of trust and love ,
doest thou seek a lover with
" that sure and trusty target let me take ,
and warm and fond as thy lovers are ,
þæt is undyrne ,                     þ̷ is un - dyrne ,
instead of hoarding it with due precision .
and when she marked the henchman 's eye
and in the evening i shall do some roller skating
in the picture story - books .
they fall unable to retreat ; around
" ' come here , ' says he , with a proper pride ,
and dreams through dozing grasses creep
poem on , by john greenleaf whittier , 91 .
aquam bibenti ? laniger contra timens :
and to the primal love our ken shall rise ;
sadly i walk'd within the field ,
and the team that he drives are his own ?
attend him , but silenus was not found .
the potent drafts and secret pill ,
aeon to aeon , in secular fever twirled ,
is fairer than all dreams can be ,
scarlet lychnis                        _ sunbeaming eyes . _
the wound it seemed both sore and sad
_ seven sessions _ more i am at least secure--
they rush , and round him kneeling , they implore
scarce sure of life , look round , and trembling move
but , drowning cry of beast or bird ,
then does the wealthy libertine succeed ,
i wat the tear blinded his e'e--
' twas new year 's eve , and slowly
is heard , since that thy neighbours are so slack
like phantoms were the folks that passed me by .
to me at my fifth - floor window
till he caught me in the shade ,
the hissing of the snakes again :
came a hero from a distance ,
_ chu - chu ! chu - chu ! _ there they are ,
for he that scattered , gathereth his flock ,
so small a thing to give so great a friend !
whene'er my name he utters ,
to pry around for in that mighty breast .
on the ocean that hollows the rocks where ye dwell ,
the verdant soil the red blood runs in streams .
a loss of feelings keen , intense ,
we 're about through now ;
him of his sight and me of heart deprivèd .
none other would they suffer / to pass the door than those .
while the everlasting pleasure , that did full
hrolf 's thrall , his song .   [ willard wattles ]
so feeble , that a pearl on forehead white
and bring the deer that charms her so ,
not theirs the terror , hate , and loss
coming to tuoni 's empire ;
die hier unten in schmerz erstarrt ,
fell upon them and hit and struck with terrible onslaught ,
yet when the sickness was sore in the land ,
of bulls , half irish and half roman--
that love the river 's side ,
is't not a shame -- is't not a shame for him
good wine -- a friend -- or being dry--
hope is a subtle glutton ;
and ere , in pounding with such gaps between ,
darkness came over the noon ... and i died !
a christian psalm for thee .
convey'd the dread decree of fate 's ordain ;
air , would i might triumph so !
from the top of the little stone fence on the right ,
that never droop in winds or showers ,
and roam'd the world with that wild brotherhood ,
lovers long - betroth'd were they :
here needs no court for our request
the trumpet sounded , and the temple shook ,
rise up from your bed in silence ,
type what the poet fain would be ;
from their kind parents , and were well content .
with a great company the baths at aix
as the only joys that are worth possessing .
the cordial drop of life is love alone ,
dreams of the knight 's stout heart and tempered will .
he has taen the watchman by the throat ,
then shook his hair , strode off , and buzzed abroad
hannah 's at the window , binding shoes .
_ gil . _ and leave me out ! where , brother , where ?
be this new soul the one
in my heart 's deep hold
like horns and drums and tops with strings ,
steps of temple , fore - stone , lintel ,
that the lion after / could forward spring but thrice .
like true men o ' strabogie ,
the sun he went down -- the last gleam from his brow
wi ' love that weel may cheer me yet ,
my mates of the dungeon sighed " amen ! "
storm'd at with shot and shell ,
his fear i could not pacify ,
' hey , love , you must n't do that !
come at evening -- come , my dear .
shouting a murderer 's doom or the death of a king .
cease , cease thou cruel ocean ,
then , bolder grown , with mute amaze
fain teach unletter'd minds to understand ,
time , looking back at last , should count my life .
“ and,--come , dear aura , ease my pain,--i cry'd
within the fane awaits a giant pyre ,
sleep softly , he or his guests . nay not so , i have rugs and
of cheery bordeaux i see
some degree , which is termed quickening . ]
we 'll buy a beefsteak on the way , a bottle and some _ brie _ . "
to strike and suffer ( 22 ) holds in surest thrall
kullervo , kalervo 's offspring ,
the captains passed in silence forth
and oversees ,
from the hoarse skies the wind replies :
in the springtime out they peep ;
i 'd truly not know how to love her
corvus , the which was thanne also
my heart with rapture thrills ,
to which pale atropos had set her knife ;
preferring to turn , with the publican 's faith ,
this day let all things ready wait
i 've just about madest up my mind to be
the spear went right through him , so that he fell groaning in
we bring deep - purple
but wantonly luxurious flow in the wind :
is a fit curtain for thy lovely sleep .
hark ! i hear the tramp of thousands ,
either to plunge some trojan in the shades ,
where hast left thy forest - apple ,
taper fingers and slender wrist ;
some joy that so long ago ,
but the ocean merges all .
was inly glad that sche hath wonne
ye by a female hand are overthrown ?
in vegtam 's song , when she for odin sung
a good deal like him too , though quite the same none ;
i 'll not believe it , no !
the first she bore a blossomed branch ,
and of desese his part receyveth ,
how inconsistent greater goods with these ;
there the proud king gaváksha , feared
as the rock that she sat on , which beetled above
the smiling spring comes in rejoicing ,
the genius old of greece invite ,
to all whose souls are fair within ;
a ' ye wha tent the gospel fauld ,
a nation 's altar even as his own .
the trusty fellow digs the grave so deep
and she may look from the bed
leapt forth like flame , the midnight banquet brightening ; '
no honour , haply by some pharian hand
for monie a beast to dead she shot ,
nannette , tochter ! dich , mein zweites leben ! "
of raleigh ringing across the smoke - wreathed room,--
to schapen eny resistence :
on earth , her beauteous memory to set
equivocating , darken and perplex .
though to the death , against such cruelties
“ each citizen , ” he cried , “ give ear ,
of all wisdom , truth , and art ,
for the master is near , the master is here ,
and the aged they him praise .
a spectre - horde repeating without change
for softness she and sweet attractive grace ;
then of this path thou wilt have reach'd the end .
and their hair unsmoothed was hanging ,
his life departed . soon the eager fiends
shrunk from his deeds of chivalrous emprize :
in the little noontide of love 's delights
and the rivers we 're eying burn to gold as they run ;
while mine is unattended ; feed
of cerberus and blackest midnight born
and a far bird calling , _ come , oh , come!_--
ordeigne wolden in this cas .
she who can tye , with quaintest art ,
of all exists a bottom,--nowhere is
astrophel and stella sonnets .
divided by her horrid sword , or cleft ?
the sacrifice is brahm , the ghee and grain
of wild sweet - williams , or the wet
bring summer and ripe fruits
for adam and his chosen sons , whom thou ,
and drop , when gentle airs come by ,
into earth she sank like snow ;
the season comes when first we met ,
with inter - motions that no one can be
when the winds blow !
there is a rose that 's ready ;
i have made the idle flowers .
i wrestled with myself , and thou , my love ,
and evermore with gazing grew enkindled .
the lustes of his appetit :
casto fruentem syrtium silentio .
and grinning faces peer out of the gloom--
thou most wert wo nt to linger , entering there
will truth explain , or mystery confess .
for freedom rose in that august array ,
and by the law of kindness they
and hymen call'd to bless the rites . _ cha . _ stop there .
strengthened of precept , fortified of rules ,
we bathe our hearts--
gehüllt in eine decke weiß und tief .
and they shall bow to death , who ruled from shore to shore ;
a play of hopes and fears ,
and to the pleasant banks of tone
with my fal , lal , la , la ,
it surgeth , and by craft do hunters quell
o'er the grey hills afar
the mune was up i ' the clear blue skye ,
to repeat the old refrain ?
beauty so high .
  a writ .
who haply might have worn instead the crown
at warsaw 's youth , some songs , and dances ,
to chance impute their deaths , then , not to me .
springing and clinging from tree to tree ,
for murther'd lausus , on his cruel foe ;
who never did him any harm ,
which only ask'd to be obey'd ,
renounce the gay for the severe,--
come hither , with your fillets and your wreaths of posies gay ;
went to the left or right ,
through which all her bright features shine ?
acquaintance , the rev . james murray , minister of old cumnock:--
far from his path , in terror of his name ,
shall yield him honor more than he hath lost !
through rencesvals a little river ran ;
a tribute to o'connell that is gone , boys , gone !
i pledg'd , to do you service , my honor and my life ,
in hearing of this very lazarus
leaped as if to meet the arrow ;
the faded fields seem brighter ,
mother made it . she 's real smart ,
i wish then i niver had heard .
" bring near him thy lamp , when in slumber he lies ;
but silence falls with fading day ,
the ancient judge from his attentive ears
while my lady sleeps in the shade below .
in thy bright , spotless mirror let me greet ,
the life that feeds upon itself is mad--
( sold only in sets . )
and most slowly came relief
and there was nothing within all that bound
last week she was smaller ,
and yet i bid thee , this night let thy bride
and came from martyrdom unto this peace . "
many have cured been
his head and felt , unfought and all aflame
battle with her to victory !
a crowd immers'd in ordure , that appear'd
all the delights which in these gardens grow ,
but being so beholden to the prince ,
and he had breathed the proctor 's dogs ; and one
land o ' the leal , the          _ lady nairne _
" she said . obedient to her high command
some graces to be seen ,
sweet love !   that dost apparel thee in smiles ,
their leaning is decided .
of battles in onset ,
thou comest not when violets lean
and that though time doth commonwealths devowre ,
but i and my soul , twin lilies together ,
waketh later than them all .
at drake 's temerity : " for , " he said , " this man ,
good deeds suffice not .   and if so , what sun
follow , you hunters , follow ,
" i 'll rid him of it altogether . "
the limits of their little reign ,
henceforth the descent is by such stairs ;   mount thou in
in cherry symphonies .
he would adore my gifts instead of me ,
preserving still his life unharmed ,
while she the inmost of the dream would try .
oaks that in earth had deeply fixed their hold
satan desires us , great and small ,
the foes whom we hold captive / fain would leave straightway ,
the elizabethan poetry , as it is rather vaguely termed , forms the
nothing contents me :
with youth and its happiness bidding their last good - byes ;
to observe the sequel , saw his guileful act
not his best , though , for those are struck off at white - heats
it seemed one might have heard it , as it went ,
to blend together ' neath your forming hand .
i remember so well the room ,
what does he but soften
the two - and - seventy jarring sects confute :
she tied a young man 's heart within .
‘ by cause ye so boldly stode me by
but warn't she as good to cuddle an ' kiss as a lass as ' ant nowt ?
and thus close enclosed , it answered me in the fashion that the
ewes and thir bleating lambs over the plaine ,
and may maggy bear sons not unworthy of you .
as down on her haunches she shuddered and sank .
an end there will have been to all their lust ,
just as finely as i could .
that was a law :
he wanted jelly on his bread ;
vainly the fowler 's eye
old poets outsing and outlove us ,
the bind - weed tendrils win their way ,
with whiskers on their faces !
_ with swift feet came the morn , but lo ! _
she stared at him with great wondering eyes . her form relaxed . i
by the desolate sea - shore ,
if not outward helpes she find ,
his tale of love.--"now bend thy head
apparently at the point of death . as he sat by his bed - side , he
and keep it in an oaken vat ;
if you could find , it would avail you naught ;
grandes voces está dando ;
while the cattle browse ,
traditions represented daphnis as beloved by a nymph who exacted
my banks they are furnished with bees ,
the silkworm , to long sleep retir'd
that the merchant risks the perils of the plain
he is seeking the way as _ bairagi _ avowed !
and to remue that fortune ,
why ring ' the brides of enderby ' ? "
old chief ! these youthful warriors are too brisk
the wind fell ; her heart sunk in her bosom with dread ,
and -- would he wish her back again ?
and so on , for two or three hours _ ad lib _ .
avenger fails to make himself felt as such to him who has done
tyll the pore clyentis be etyn to the bone
{ 40c } ten brink points out the strongly heathen character of this
this english woodland than thy keen despair ,
wildly the winter wind howls round his pillow ,
the riches of potosi 's mines .
eternal darkness wrapp’d the warrior round ,
and make her walk on the window - sill
he cried : " what would ye ?   where is your escort ?
have i not held but one poor broken reed
but if the boon thou still deny ,
that is the time their grace to gain ,
with serpents , toads , and other filth ,
the looking - glasses got about ,
at ajax hector threw his glitt'ring spear :
the stones that make no sign , then falls again .
a sober tone ; our very household songs
little he loves such risks , i know ;
leaps she , bow to shoulder , shaft
special applications of that doctrine , which formed part of the
beneath the bare and flowerless window 's sill ,
yours is the thrill and the laurel :
is laid upon the quivering hills until ,
with the sharp spear , and in place of wedding banquet thy
" ye macaroni train " .   the macaronies were the foplings ,
things that do almost mock the grasp of thought .
bot sche , which hath ben overlad
i 'll stay at home and darn the stocking !
her queenly self . but my resolve is taken ,
and the last scene is played in death 's red charnel house .
shall not dissemble their surprise
that lady - smock , that pansy , and that rose
the thracian poet long ago ,
the lover of old literature will here find the obscure but
for loyal faith and lofty deeds ordained ;
through veins ( he cried ) of royal fathers flow'd :
her spirit , suffered more . why do we suffer ?
the thanks that his nation would render ,
ever turns from wisdom 's way ;
to meet me with the old surprise ,
clapping his rod on the borde ,
the sudden , scythe - like sweep of wings , that dare
and in it two glassen een you 'll put .
" you took a strange way to prove it , " she returned .
and somers thought a minute , then ejaculated , " done !
the clerk , the scholar whom the love of pelf
and worn with famine , long and ceaseless hiss ,
stand mute , self - centred , stern , and dream no more ?
love may be long chusing a dart .
of order , sins against th ' eternal cause .
and up the mountain - sides of dreams .
the one squeaking thus , and the other down so !
the smallest bark on life 's , 77 .
helen , none knows
you will not think , great cosmocrat !
his sharp spear thrusting , hurl'd him to the ground ,
discharg'd his minde , and thus began to say .
save of her faith ye have assurance true ;
but soon o'er it is flung a shadow . "
that ever empty in this stirring stream .
mecistes slew , polites echius ,
those care - paths cold when the king he slew . { 32a }
never is lisp or the ripple of rain :
and pearly vapors lie
like those unreturning comets ,
with life or death in the balance : right !
a truant from school , my footsteps would stray
hers was the subtlest spell by far
if i was body , ( and we here conceive not
waves in its plumes the various light .
' o teague , i 'm horrid sick , shew me to bed . '
a coal flew out and burnt her hand .
you took in yours my hands ,
i dream of your soft and sorrowful eyes
while the ship crouches , quivering .
nervous your rival strikes and heels his ball--
they whisper to me in the dark
her hair is like the sunny beam ,
dew - bespangled lotus , crocus , and hyacinth , so soft and thick
you shine a star above this stormy night
thy bounteous gifts , not any grace of mine ,
with any near or distant good ,
if you to canaan bring 's at last ,
ye shall know him among twenty ;
of ither vile , wanrestfu ' pets--
loosed him , laughed to see the writing rankle ,
hystorian , who thus largely hast allayd
the sword may be whet , and the battle set ,
a ser marinera .
by force , who reason for thir law refuse ,
that before i know it , almost , it 's monday .
for he who has no sister seems to me to live in vain .
man true to man , to his kindness
the monke over - tolde it me .
thou art come from the spirits ' land :
for that he scholde noght be spilt .
and saints may be framed of as handy materials;--
stoop to me , breathe on me , smile on me , waver , " _ awake !
wer hat dich , du schöner wald
where men crushed for me the grapes of joy ,
unto a day of delight , while at his altar i kneel .
the hard - made loaf of cornbread .
henceforth no lycian will go forth for troy
fullest of love , and of most ample space ,
they were my playmates when a child ,
' tis a month before the month of may ,
in fleshly form now harbor deadly spite
the many - coloured images imprest
he has pull'd down all upon him .
a morsel of the thread once used to bind him ;
sterile in kant , the essential tendency of the german school of
to ilium sent , to join the war of troy .
and at his feet the watchful angel stands .
nothing is left at last of what one time was all .
a visible token of the upholding love ,
a youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke ,
but so that not a feather of him fluttered .
and noble souls beside the shining streams
“ though in appearance credence far beyond ,
non ingratus ager , focus perennis ;
ov this warld 's griefs , yoo may depend ,
the former with a variety of information on matters of current
i dinner'd wi ' a lord .
and the branches brushed against him .
please be certain that it grows
this enterprise forbear i to pursue ,
round bharat ’s neck thy fond arms twine ,
in hills beyond the jordon . haman , can
only odysseus felt his heart engage
nov . 18 .    leave makalá , arrive guriá .
false woman , what a mind and heart
that , that was not apollo , not the god .
in feild and tun , in frith and felle ,
us if from our winter and our mistiness there
now , beneath the moaning pine ,
volatile hermes , and call up unbound
worthy in all our convent , so i
and sheathing all his limbs in plate and mail .
too much , with nought .   the westering phoebus ' horse
with such consort as they keep ,
drench his sweet eyes with scalding tears ?
what terrors from her frowning front arise !
your temple 's architrave ?
with her finger tips ,
my fancies , fly before ye ;
fast fading from a dead man 's will .
one of those darts , of which she had heard so oft ,
your toils are past ; no more ye wake to feel
of loue 's all - daring hand , that makes me burne ,
with the brightest streaks of crimson ,
princes have been directed by the credit of history , as brutus ,
and listen , still ,
un'ta - ma'la .    a synonym for " the dismal sariola . "
an ' whiles i 'm kind o ' pleased a blink ,
one whole day a swallow journeyed
the english dame who 's all aflame with divers colors bright ,
as her song rang sadder and sadder the while ,
must close mine eyes -- as thou wouldst hide thy face
nos ita jam exercet nimii impatientia voti ,
yet the old mediaeval tradition ,
an infant crying in the night ;
the vital heat , that warms the laboring heart ,
oh , they listened , looked , and waited ,
delighting in her holy vows ,
nodding and mocking along the wall , with gestures fantastic ,
she said , and turn'd from mars her glorious eyes .
and goodman asquith shivereth .
has not some horse - hereafter .
surrendered ? o , no ! for its work is not done :
subject .
and strange alarms await all royal things--
for fear the moon should shine alone ,
to bear him to a better shore rejoicing : he
the rubicon , was of so bold a flight ,
beneath the rain of the sharp martyrdom .
unyoked from the waggons , driven off to the bindweed pastures
et lituo vexare viros , calcare caballos .
like ghosts adown the river 's blackening floor
and crashing and crumbling,--
anemonies and cinque - foils , violets blue
were wo nt before . '
as high he , disobeying , thought to soar :
that glorious blaze behind the town ?
that sark she coft for her wee nannie ,
of a wild and inconsolable despair .
in those dear days , in those dear days ,
adieu , dun , mighty stream , adieu !
but , as the practice was quite unfamiliar ,
when the famous state militia
to hear saint antonius .
yet , man in god , and god in man ,
as the vision of his dreaming--
an ' may you never go dry , go dry ,
down to lucretia 's sorrow , in seven kings
but curse not him ; perhaps now he ,
but bodies , no ; wound them they never might .
" i prythee , sweet - heart , then tell to mee ,
than that which bradamant endured whilere :
inhaling for ever your song and your sigh !
was granted him ; and thus he ther
of their forget - me - nots ;
but i have never made a whine ;
and , last of all , whate'er befall ,
if e'er he bore the sword to strengthen ill ,
yet never solve the riddle of the skies ,
with serpents were their hands behind them bound ,
" while the man - in - the - moon was looking at me . "
_ some _ shell - holes we have met ,
i might not pass by night or day
who are weary of learning and art ,
full high do stand my kinsmen ; / the more it doth me grieve
the monster to confront , at first ,
thenceforth to speculations high or deep
with that old branch of silver , like a magpie
when we cam ' in by glasgow toun ,
so that i might be assured
thou say'st an undisputed thing
at present in the bonds of num'rous ills .
blown back by the sweet wavering air .
fair , too , thou city where our fasces have
he got flag ; chop b'long we_ll_y cu_l_io , see--
moon in a cloud , a cloud of snow ,
asper , acerba tuens , immani corpore serpens
make the companion of an idle hour
last o'er the field the mite enormous swims ,
by god built over the sheer depth
and history 's burning pencil
by which life is exalted , embellished , refined ,
in the hour of darkness and peril and need ,
di questa imperial caduca spoglia
among shadows deep ,
gheezis , the great sun , behold me ! "
by many thousand times then this our sphear
from sorrow 's weal
cried " here the hallow'd visage saves not : here
the cyprian queen , whose gentle hand
" so long a tramp ? " two gentle nods ,
the silv'ry thetis bids her surges roar ,
comes laden wi ' the breath o ' the hawthorn tree .
that shocking tale about the beef ;
see how he answers gun for gun--
hate 's fiery flood , that alien to all fear ,
théologie . pourquoi ne le comprendraient - ils pas en art , en
her end without least motion , and receaves ,
the important transit of the hour ,
the balm thy touch to mortal bruises brings .
there stands a rock , high , eminent and steep ,
and though he stand ' mid men alone ,
--if there be none , the gods have done us wrong.--
on apuleius 's golden ass ,
ah ! on shore , and to the wood
an everlasting diamond should it mark .
old ocean 's gray and melancholy waste--
not without labor hard , halting uncouth .
" ole jim wo n't blame yeh when she 's gone .
some sparkles from that loftier sphere
virginia , virgin name , and may you wear
the foam that glimmered on her brow ,
between an ox - stall and an ass
it is very nice to think
mother says , " be kind , my son ,
and his wild and stormy revels .
on the wav'd backe of every swelling straine ,
once more that stately structure of his dreams
men also , and by his suggestion taught ,
but innocent peace , the peace that is a child 's ,
nay , frustrate hope art thou , of the unknown ,
elected umpire , here comes to - day ,
was not fated . but juno said to minerva , " alas , daughter of
not for revenge or affright ,
over the moon - blanched sward ;
thus many whiche say that they theyr grammer can
to give more cool to the day !
as heaven itself were brought more near.--
" this is so strange a thing , it is great sign
content with this , " jehovah will provide , "
lies wounded in his tent , needing like aid
when all the worth that men adorns
with hideous ruine and combustion down
on her lips i kissed my tears in , on her lips and on her eyes
waiting her passage ,
but yesterweek where the cloud waves rolled
that lifts by fits her sable hair .
to what or where
from wagner 's grave and sumter 's walls ?
so on a woodland life intent ,
if that he fought , and had the higher hand ,
new mean , new mean , i hail thee ,
by too excessive zeal , and on the other
though wide apart the lines our fate has traced
lays her gentle hand in mine .
she sleeps , beyond all rage of earth or sea ;
“ hush , hush , i ’ll not believe thy voice ,
clambers she , with footsteps light ,
well : i walked de roads , till de roads git muddy .
the match that 's made for just and true respects ,
i bowed my head lest they put out my glory
earlier florentines dressed themselves in g. villani , 1 vi .   c.
litulle johne can say ,
cloud , sunset , moonrise , star - shine too ,
no , soul ! not in vain thou hast striven ,
wherefore to shape him out i stayed my feet , and the sweet leader
was like that music as it came ; and then
thou mighty prince of church and state ,
thrills , if he hear the vesper bell from far ,
the city glares with its sardonyx towers .
where beauty reigns o'er scenes sublime ,
the early birds erelong will wake :
welt'ring in blood , each other 's arms infold ?
at ii . 569 - 580 , by the sad and solemn movement of the close ,
with fond intent to wake the rural song ,
is fairer far in may ,
ovide telleth in his bok
and so soon to be forgotten
a soft voice says ... " sleep ! "
of the blisses of the former ,
dost thou thy little spot survey ,
when violets come again .
and never was a royal jest
their common enemy -- a millennial banquet truly .
killing pleasures , wounding blisses ;
how otherwise , shall i discern and grope
if you 's jes as sweet as i thinks you to be ,
" tell me how to know this ahti ,
of perilous seas in faery lands forlorn ,
short - lived themselves , to immortalise their bones .
the spirit is not found save through the flesh ,
and now antilochus with nice survey
" on a green spot in the desert ,
still shine the unoffending feet
accordingly he attempts it . an allegory of the state of one 's own
little brother ?
if a task is once begun ,
though small , we are not forgotten ;
and harps that wailed along the ocean ,
body and soul in every part ,
and from her grief to hurl .
count the heaped treasure
along o ' my old brown mule .
first of the long - haired nations , on whose necks
he went on earth ; the service above guile
oh ! let him sing his happy song ,
and grapes with purple stain ,
the power to do , the pride to dare .
of all the girls that are so smart ,
no traitors in our land we find ,
holy fires .
the scraps of bone they will make into dice ,
as an answer to a prayer .
the sorrow that makes the days long ;
and decent on the funeral bed bestow'd ;
" i 'm nine years old !   an ' you ca n't guess how much i weigh , i
while wind flows over the darkened sand
stream to the spring from whence it came .
his fond and foolish minde ,
the rustling curtains ; of each cranny makes
glimpses of a life beyond come to each faint , weary heart ,
i know it . and , " what of it ? " i reply .
the charred ash drop out of the dropping pyre ,
since then some restive horses , and alone ,
rejoice with me that god hath brought
and mamma in her ' kerchief , and i in my cap ,
hope to her bosom brings -
when will the dancers leave her alone ?
that never shall know a defeat ,
for payment of their dues ; as yet disowned ,
the mornin ' opes its e'e ;
" i am going , o nokomis ,
read erect and form commanding ,
--the harvest of a quiet eye
in either wing two champions fought ;
that such misery could follow ,
until that comes which has the quality to strike and to unclose ,
then , buckling to the work , our oars divide the main .
down the arcane where night would perish in night ,
head to listen:--
steal my bear and blooming branches . "
i give thee to this man away .
as he beheld them from the region cold
the door of lust , the door of wrath , the door
one day beside her untouched plateful ,
and , each in visible form and frame ,
if the grasses die or grow .
to him wound up and coiled . whereon he turned toward the right ,
by word , or pen , or pointed steel !
was born
freshly sparkles garden to stripe - shadowed orchard ,
twenty froggies went to school
and yonder in the fireglow is my squaw .
as if to crash down on his decks ; the next ,
_ brander _ . ' tis all your fault ; no food for fun you bring ,
it is a great game :
the ambrosial veil which all the graces wove ;
alas ! alas ! how different flows
but dull resemblances of thee .
all generations and gave forth at birth
it can not cover half my sins -
saragossa 's first physician ,
for i am made as a naked blade
it fareth with my body , " answer'd he ,
and from the sight of jesus turned and fled .
forgetting and forgotten and unknown
part true , part false . her daddy nips a little ,
( the mighty fled , pursued by stronger might :)
upon the topmast tree .
many sails at rest ,
as leaps the warfire on the beacon hills ,
the judas gang that would her rights betray .
lokeren , the cocks crew and twilight dawned clear ;
where grave odysseus wakened from his dream .
eres de linaje limpio
when first she gleamed upon my sight ;
too sweet to think of , and with love 's surprise
cronos , made me desolate of all , for surely it was his
with a stern cold glare , and a stern old song:--
riht so was thanne a noble kniht ,
or he leaned on the rail of the bridge , letting
of scenes such as these , when a bare - footed boy
webs my bare floor :
comparing shapes with him.<16 >   his face was fleshy , his
he slept and he dreamt of the surge and storming of battle .
the smile upon their faces , but , full soon ,
when the crocodile queen came home , she found
upon a sorry , little , hackney tied ,
the money - changers throng the temple gates ;
with such care is it needful , and such food ,
so brightsome of blee !
and ye said , " we have seen , he hath seen us ,
more than in syngynge or other meledy
their feeble weight no more ; his arms alone
the saint or moralist should tread
thou passest now a mermaid of the sea
the pleasant waters
o come , my bonnie bark !
high - minded hero , who hadst rather writ
it seems to woo its loathsome follower,--
since you , of all our numerous race alone
wha 's fou now ?
ver . 23 . _ greatest with the least ; _ ] as acting more strongly and
life is a quest and love a quarrel--
" let the death - maid sit beside thee ,
the outward facts of our ' sweet singer 's ' story are given with
grim death will bear me hence away ,
_ oberon and titania to the fairy train _ ( from " midsummer - night 's
then , in my cosy home , think , with a grin ,
and now their hope of fame achieved !
one vernal eve , he had o'erflow'd
i loved remote horizons with far clouds
and wooed her , and won her , and made her queen .
i 'm tauld the muse ye hae negleckit ;
poor vadius , long with learned spleen devoured ,
what compensation therefore may he find ?
and mullion , with that monstrous chin ,
and wilde , how shall we breath in other aire
but cause they 're low and little :
his heart beat awfully against his side ;
a little while and we die ; shall life not thrive as it may ?
and threw him in the dirt ;
in all her stainless charms ,
and fish with fish ; to graze the herb all leaving ,
wake a voice of woe , once laughter
and great nonsense , i fear , to their prejudiced ears ;
when viewed through pain , --
and they felt the land of the folk - songs
unleash thy crouching thunders now , o jove !
oh , open the door , some pity to shew ,
the blank monotonous sink and swell lulled me
and may a life - long happiness attend him !
and i was glad ; for by that sign i knew
and lights them with consoling gleam ,
i heard the bells of sligo say
an ' de dev 's to pay for belgium
she pitied not the mourner ; she stoop'd not to the low .
to dwell with streaming eyes upon the past ;
prepares the way for man 's docility .
it has fingers , it has hair ;
lo the roses of death , grey as the dust , chiller of leaf
up and away !
ships will carry navigation lights--"precautionary measure , "
' twasn't direct,--'twas serpentine ,
but god 's own eye,--and pass the night in prayer .
half nude on the bare ground , and covered with scars
can i then quit thee , whose memory ’s so dear ,
carthæïa ' walls in ancient cæä 's isle ,
he reached for his whistle and stertit tae play ;
' ulysses , noble son of laertes , go back at once to the sea where
which was against the rule .
the ground beneath he deeply stains ,
described as " an offering of natural products from the land of
he said , and with his longing arms essay’d
loud pipes the redbreast -- troubadour of spring ,
descended , perhaps , from one of the band --
in its perfection to thy face .
pierced not , for at the disk , with blunted point
he is a swine !   i tell him to his face :
to be away from you ! there are no words
who in few minutes more thyself shalt see?--
it was to jason , powerful king of the cretans , she granted
of helpless , hopeless pain .
so , poet and romancer -- old as young ,
persean conquest;--seek no more ,
hand -- not alone , for his two fleet dogs went with him .   minerva
the text of 1827 returns to that of 1807 .
and emulate the notes that wrung
shoulders out a bridge ,
when from each temple of the free ,
did not let this bring me trouble ,
and in my soule am free ,
give the fir - trees shining silver ,
around the pulseless wrists ;
we may be wise , or rich , or great ,
still his wifey 's melancholy did not fail , fail , fail .
velvet flesh for viola !
all purple o'er their sable hair ?
unto eternity , and out of florence
the listening in my heart ! ' said thine , ' my dear ,
the truth that is confounded there below ,
but they sharpened no weapons at all ,
shall i return?--the gods but know .
bare , as a wild wave in the wide north - sea ,
and will not hear man groan chained to the sodden ground ,
secure themselves , no longer dealing death ,
there was more meaning lurk'd than met the ear .
" now rightly what we tell thee , / mark , o sister dear :
it shall come on thee with a swift surprise .   thine eyes
not be detected in it . a severe critic might curtail that
till i have certain knowledge who
and next day he was taken away
and , even yet , i dare not let it languish ,
at loop holes cut through the thickest shade those leaves ,
for they we know will cost him nought ;
and listen in vain
with change of spring and summer through the year :
deemed him unparalleled ; and in amaze ,
silken - leashed and decked with weeds
my sense ; not when from lacedaemon first
threaten'd at once with instant fate the king
an arab horse , a stately stag , a barb
theim hildar vendi ,
from street to street , and sin without controul ;
ye judged me cauld 's a chucky stane -
are the fair issues of his head ,
forest sings .
if this ambassage sharp or pleasing be . "
the world on which i 'm blinking ;
" there be many singers greater than thou . "
and grateful vows , and generous thanks might pay
( long centuries have come and gone ) ,
whose wanton babble , as it swell'd or sank ,
being all of the same opinion , it becomes me to be silent and to
tha’ll nivver hev a day ta rue
' within our world , how comes it that no trace
wie schön mir träumte , das erzähl ' ich dir--
the perfect miniatures of these monstrous foes .
the will which of my bodi moeveth ,
to the god whom we trust , for our cause firm but just ,
burden of some melancholy
when the day - spring from on high shall light
thurgh falssemblant , as i schal telle .
of holier love . nor wilt thou then forget ,
nor nobly seized me in the dire alarms
but thou shalt yet have peace ; only not now ,
they were learnin ' the regular work of our corps ,
have past behind us . "   as one , mountain - bred ,
" what ! " cried the baker man , in astonishment .
kneels with his forehead to the south
and now , as he went bowing down
appeareth of heav'n 's sphere , that ever whirls
summer and winter , till i loathed to live ,
true , however false are others :
garden of latin literature , despised these simple wayside
and rang : " room ten , and answer , please . "
from shepheard 's ( which means cairo ) to that little
things , without doing aught that is contrary to your wishes . but
light to spring up to thy house ?
but when we 've also seen the glass itself ,
" oh , fare ye weel , my ladye gaye !
for an instant throbs her bosom , for an instant
through the sweet musick which his harp did make
and fear of seeming short of speech , or whether
the paladin this bank and the other eyed ,
hazes of nebulous silver veil the height ,
for a game ,
from her kennel beneath the rock
with deeper sobs reviving lovers breathe ,
“ shames most that i this palamedes brought ,
than smiles of other maidens are .
i 've seen a little girl , mama ,
single - edged axes . "
i asked if it made him happy or miserable .
joyless and gray ,
his young limbs from the chains that round him press .
and leave dull earth behind us .
on a tree by the side of the way ; and rahero carried him in ,
thicket and plain ,
the only different trait is this ,
caucasus , hyrrcanaeque admorunt ubera tigres : "
howling he grinds his empty jaws ;
swings in the sucking breeze , and swinging beats
into the throng of trojan warriors , terror - stricken at the sight
' for nine whole days we sailed by night and day
this paper ( underneath my hand )
wealth and the high estate of pride ,
leaned on his ancient sword ,
--a merry mind
when i rush also to the glorious field .
you sit crouched in your palanquin and repeat the names of the
and learn instructions from a friend .
balm to all my frenzied pain ,
and i stole near to him.--his white eyes gleamed
who knows the nation , who the name ,
say , wilt thou , my dear ? ' and she wilted . "
what a singular thing !
there first for thee my psssion grew ,
then wrong it were that any other twaine
this said , his visage shone with beams divine ,
for , what with my whole world - wide wandering ,
the ships reliev'd , return forthwith ; and though
thine affianced is not ready .
hear where young birds hold their high festival ;
of slaughter and of dust all dappled o'er ;
so crush'd his heart , no wish he had
is sure enough to make a mortal man
with feathered cincture ; naked else , and wild
and shattered wrecks lie thicker on the strand .
of turrets , montereggion crowns his walls ;
what is life when wanting love ?
for conscience ' sake ? is that no work ? thou silly gull ,
with night we banish sorrow ,
--so , warm and buoyant in his oily mail ,
i 'd set the scientists to work like superheated gnomes ,
and it is changed beneath his feet , and all
wainamoinen , long reflecting ,
he set op he s horse anon ,
" thy woeful wound , thine anguish , shall be healed ,
and thinks of lines that long have faded .
above , about the old church door,--
there where the souls repair to lave themselves ,
slim young body and eyes as brown
i feared indeed , that in my play with fate ,
drifting about like birds of prey .
i chase my shadow , and perch where no bird dare
sad nature strained the leash in vain ,
kissing and bussing differ both in this , 391 .
the tendrils of the trumpet - vine have run ,
let me , from mine own heart , unwind such grace .
" about the time ,
against thine heart . " " good my lord ! " answered she ,
perhaps they 'd tampered with the scale !
and left the rope behind .
mingling -- and made by love -- unto one mighty end .
of passion , i to them had quitted all ,
and if once more the rich milk - flowing land
to share the toys with which you play ,
we know all about 'em ,
of his creation , to learn well to die ;
a silver web has the moon spun ,
the synagogue crowded with worshippers .   among the women in the
signalized by brier and burr ,
and brings to his abode ,      where it builds a nest
lie scentless and dead .
you understand , then , distinctly , that i do not believe there is
those wild men 's vices he received ,
oft strove she , but in vain , to break that band ,
up and still up to its one ultimate
" o america , o first - born
which greatly damped his young and ardent zeal .
and pass , escaped , to thee ?
ah yes , and they benumb us at our call !
before rude hands have touch'd it ?
from those smooth lips -- alas ! they were his own .
for whom no river remained .
to such an anthem sung
doubt not that i have counted well the cost .
thou art a man supreme in place .
_ o - jin _           " tenderness,"--humanity .
gave to the dim harmonics voice and tongue ?
to me .
does foul abuse become a moralist ?
in solitude live savage , in some glad
american in heart ,
breathing our welcome to these vernal vales ;
as an indian in a wood ;
receive it also of the hoary deep ,
with little flecks of gray ,
and eve videha ’s kingdom showed .
hurried by the wind ,
between the womans seed
for she knew she was naughty just then ;
where love has lit its fragrant fire ,
there he saw vidarbha 's maiden -- girt with all her virgin bands ;
he wole hem do som grace ayein ,
and pierce the bright regions , which ages assign'd
ay , and when you slept , a baby , over all the english lands
even as i sing , suffuse my face ;
our ire is felt on every shore ,
as though its king lived .   when that son beheld
whiche in dyuers scyencis ar fast laborynge
a mass of ashes slaked with blood .
and dog - skin wallet ,
the air is so fine that it cherish the frame ,
the tales they tell , the sangs they sing ,
pains , reading , study , are their just pretence ,
they blushed for the love of herself , i vow .
i have no part ....
swiftly we went through the sunny air ,
some men take pleasour and solace to beholde . "
was because love to cast out had no skill
air has been given forth abroad , forthwith
vigour , and youth , and active days are past--
and , wagging his sagacious head ,
my heart is set to entertain
water and bread ,
of troy divine and smooth scamander 's stream .
bears me to her pillow under white rose - wreaths .
with these he parts the winds , the clouds , the air ,
and from each ample fold
the times down from their sins ? did christ select
surely , ye say , he is strong , though the times be against him and
of feeling faint to gallivant on land
his stamping hoofs in vain seek foothold ,
bot onli forto slepe and route
ad patrios montes et ad incunabula nostra--
school physician first
will be sure to clap you ,
shadows vanished away .   no secret place could hide the deep
his twining serpents , destined still to be
atone together .
the nightingales thy coming each - where sing ;
but they shall feel the scourge themselves advis'd ;
of youthful hinds , once pleasant to the eye ,
que á los regicidas la vida perdona ,
your ways and make a mock of them ,
then a beam of fun outbroke
and if she should return ...       [ _ listening . _
thus on from grade to grade doth it proceed .
does the daylight astonish ? does the early redstart twittering
but like many another lover
so spoke the fair , nor knew her brothers ’ doom;(118 )
lady lorgnette , of the lifted lash ,
and the yard will then be longer ,
then seeing a raft near , i struggled onward ,
and the sunlight knows no tears .
three eyes were seen .   in rear of all this group ,
seek now the shore ,      the sea - mew 's home !
undid the goodly gold from her clasped waist ;
was turned away .   the noble youths were sheltered from the
" i want to do it at once . what do you think of it ? "
the stately messenger , now bowing low
against the churl 's right cheek the weapon went :
a strange look on the dying man she cast ,
thou tell'st not , or thy words come not to pass .
of that first sudden plash of dawn ,
when jumping time away on old crossberry way ,
not to repel or destroy so much as accept , fuse , rehabilitate ,
quickly into his ear his companion secretly whisper'd
by force of wisest argument . ”
they say the lion and the lizard keep
and proud of its name of high degree ,
for her i 'll proudlier speak:- how could it be
their evil hands are wet and red .
row us out from desenzano , to your sirmione row !
on the blade of mighty ahti ,
otherwise the twofold animal was gleaming therewithin , now with
bites in twain the softer iron ,
and climbing up to the lady , sings : --
" or perchance are you lamenting ,
aught of those exiles ?
mounts with light bound , and graceful , as she bends ,
so sly therein herself convey’d .
to frenzy which must rave , none heeds the clamour ,
as she did here ,
down such a steep flight must we now descend !
" think if his heart is trembling at its core ,
wicked witch of tuonela ,
so that the dede his word arawhte ;
from ev'ry leaf distils a trickling tear ,
can not tell why we or they
and do your flower - mouth too much wrong .
" but , as for the guilders , what we spoke
under floods that are deepest ,
" that meets thee there fresh from the well - known flowers
thus only longer - lived would be ;
and , cool and calm , a cascade far away
and the dew of the dayspring benignly descended ,
her adorable head that arose ;
all trembling kiss'd .   the book and writer both
of his fair face , and found , by sympathy ,
hymn ( the spacious firmament on high )
saw beatrice turned toward the animal that is only one person in
woe to thee , base heart , from the eyes that sleep !
till he the bottom of the brimmer saw .
billows murmur at our feet ,
over beach of yellow sand ,
canst , from death ; or cause that they break this covenant . "
then came old jules of the sightless gaze ,
when you by ways and means you know not now ,
if that love were deceived in death , then the canker of this
all benediction over you--
of deity ashamed , --
that they seem in one united ,
sets most store by ; let her , moreover , promise to sacrifice
( ' twas hard to repress my heart - heavings
cleaving till out the truth he clove .
and her eyes , close them ,
thus , at peace with god and the world , the farmer of grand - pre
" i mean , my lords , those powers that the queen
my little dusky pekinese .
the same might make him master / o'er all the race of men .
pictus britannis ambiat , an geta ,
the stony brow . it is a creed professed
that looks on tempests , and is never shaken ;
but she has lost her looks of late ,
ye cliffs , in hoary grandeur piled ,
and greener thy landscapes , and fairer thy ' flowers ;
hid the fierce sky , and still the ruin came .
for ever it was , and ever it shal bifalle ,
the other screening , oft they roll them round ,
nor ask why thou couldst flee
now to my house my steps i bend —
an ' many times when i do vind
so i , to whom atrides thus replied .
guide and companion of the youth , whose eye
which when thou earnest from phthia to the aid
till you meet your angry fathers
whitening the blue heave of the drowsy swells ,
who strike obliquely upwards , nor are his tushes for other
two more he seiz'd , and to his supper fell .
and summer grow and gild ,
to touch the pulsing soul within it--
and all the mysteries to faith proposed ,
cauesque , ne sit tristis et dulci carens
he passes from life to his rest in the grave .
great jove and phoebus graced his noble line :
and from his aromatique cell he gives
death and disaster through the billows bore .
dejectedly .   hund the tykes ] direct the dogs .   steeks ]
amidst that cruel conflict , on his foes ,
leaving the whole _ lay_-world , since then ,
and , lo ! the long laborious miles
and they before whose sleepy eyes
along the budding grass ,
his arms , will in the temple hang them high
said , ' ye , that so dishallow the holy sleep ,
( his patience was rewarded , so to speak )
soon will she lie like a white - frost sunrise .
about the coming of the lord ! '
still hope for better days : chain not to woe
like a bird in the wide air ,
o men ! o trees in copses cold !
then with a sterner voice he cried :
at length the conjurer 's lips the silence broke ,
with god behind me , god ahead ,
love gives love its quick'ning power--
in a conception of whom there is freedom from all limitation,--
i bring ye love .   ques . what will love do ?
of trouble . '
and ride for your lives , for your lives you must ride !
whose hand protect me from myself but thine ?
of bankers , schoolmasters , and clergymen
and health of sinner 's soul ;
that all my saving help should share
the chariot in the race , least skill'd of all .
hasten to the burning mountain ,
doth he vamoose ? yes , a season ,
to hide within thy breast,--nor speak ,
on board his ship , and fill'd with rich attire ,
in . then tell me , for thou knowest , what is fire ?
wind in the south - west ; weather wondrous fine ;
had shap'd into a doggish grin ; whence creeps
industrious murmur . "
on robbery , and crime , and wrong ?
speak , " o soul , that art hidden there below , thy romagna is not ,
' twill make your courage rise .
were love 's purveyors .   in its leaves that day
with double love i kiss your hand,--
" it 's vera good , " said the chief engineer , looking along the
nay , he has put it into mine ,
to grace the full pavilion .   his design
whilst two braue battailes are to bring supplies :
in love , of that i have mispoke ,
perception above mentioned ; the first is derived from a degree of
how the nice boys all will give mouth at the call ,
with brazen accents hoarsely sings .
reproach we may the living , not the dead , ii . 19 .
back to her cottage sho shogs ;
for ten years had parted my auld hame and me--
to check such monarchs as with brutal might
working in these walls of time ;
which echo'd , shrilling back the sharp despair ,
as go the minor friars along their way .
and the heat of the quivering flame could not mar their beauty ;
“ he ’s gained at length fortune ’s bequest,--
possession of the late frederick locker lampson . )
  that is , of the heavens , new as compared with the first
then she bowed herself before it .
charlie , charlie , wha wadna follow thee ,
poor little polly !
then looked a moment on me with kind eyes .
of which the one may thrust the sun away
sweetly he speaks , so sweetly with his lyre ,
despotic empress of old ocean 's tide ; --
and not let you fall .
that i am undertaking .   the last garment
only a little more
it might be easier
pluck from the overflow
" only for my two loves ' sake ,
in the wide snow - desert , far and grand ,
the free , broad field of thought .
discovered , and defeated of your prey ,
of patient faith and silent tears ,
what should we doubt of the years that roll ?
( _ lady dufferin 's fund for medical aid to the women of india _ ) .
of devon -- for this morning when the queen
for he acted like the ruler ,
for who this conqueror to account dare call ,
and a color glossy ,
the mother loved them years ago ;
the voice of the evening - gun ,
no cold approach , no altered mien ,
that leaves not a stain nor a secret untold , --
which sinks should bear me past all fear and sorrow
the flees of gold so wel ne kepte
at his own filthy stuff he grins and brays ,
whereof comes blessing unto men .   but thine--
i 'm happier than many a king
and lost in love , and friendship 's smile
problemes and demandes eke ,
are rendered worthy of the name of man ; it is in the
the symbol which you seek is found in you .
who love not folly . night should not debar ,
glimmering in pallid fire , vppon some greene ,
there was i nourished and tended , and there was taheia born . "
his was mere trifling , really meant no harm ;
these flow'rs with hasty , stretch'd heads grow
why does n't mr . claude come with us ? you ask.--we do n't know ,
the silent city where they wait
to greet his love by the smithy fire--
telling him tales of islands in the moon ,
a wasted female figure ,
what followed the ensuing strain will say .
have i been so beguiled as to be blind
the rat , the mouse , and the little frog - gee !
from our immemorial joys of hearth and home and love
in which the veins implanted seem to lie
to taste thy cool reviving air ;
babbling our parents ' fame and our own deeds ?
nor left she any thing of her lament
climbing the tree of honour glow - crowned .
or northern kuru ’s blissful shade ;
nor lack all things that we desire .
and shows the diamond - stars from hoofs up - whirled ,
an ' grindin ' her talents ez sharp ez all nater ,
its full development when jesus came
god 's skies are not more blue than they .
for him shall the drum be beat , for him be raised the song ,
this youth ( the blissful vision of a day )
what pictures to the taster rise ,
delighted all the while to think
to a low sheltered vale above the plains ,
how grim of wit , when wit alone might serve !
of human peace on earth . the pillars , these :
while others declare ' twas the ninth he was born ,
though my friends a ' be gane whar i yet hae to gang ,
with a hey , dolly ! ho , dolly !
sufficient thing -- to travel still
i save a life dearer to me than mine . '
that tree , which late on avon 's border grew ;
as if the wind could stand north - south ;
while cranes from hoary winter fly
" then , " quoth ingcél , " i said , gazing at him :
in classic beauty , cold , immaculate ,
or to wander at newark , like ill fated hugh ,
in vain lamented by the bleating dam .
this ancient and splendid pile is a fitting residence for the
to the cold north , with pious hand ?
on the shore of ro - a - no - ak
the wind - tower on the emir 's dome
joy , the proud worldling , shunn'd the child of shame !
all of blue silver is the sky ,
was wo nt to glance and sparkle like a gem
" my fault , " pursued she sadly , " good cause had i to rue .
" _ the starry virgin of the east
for the dear god who loveth us ,
but now , gee !
by what appears unto our failing sight
and notwithstanding that mine eyes might be
and ye think that the chant is done ,
i 'll tell thee why i came , and what i heard
wherefore my friend forsook his quiet and regular ways ,
cranberry upon the heather ,
( he had given her a farm to be still . )
and the very strong man , kwasind ,
but in your happy memory look
and as suspended by the barque 's low side ,
last , and pre - eminently , i challenge for this poet the gift of
my love and fortune first did run ;
above your unconcern !
smile upon me , baby mine--
his longitude through heav'ns high rode : the gray
curly locks , what do you know of the world ,
was quite as bad as that ,
see the maid with yellow tresses !
have you seen but a bright lily grow
which he occupied when
warm through the casement 's muffling jasmine bloom .
to guard his person , or assuage his grief .
" though basking in the sunshine of renown .
i , bound behind him in the captive 's place ,
that for pure love straightway shame 's self was dead .
upon the libyan shores ? if thou , indeed , art moved
floods the dull wheel with light and grace ,
and such a gallant holiday .
spirit of mirth , whose chime of bells
incoherency about your growing old .   why , my dear
so longe thei togedre dele ,
neat lodgings -- rather dear for me ;
far away ; and on either hand ,
yes , that 's my name .   what 's yours ?
and the maiden soon forgot her fear .
of the delicate harebell and violet blue ;
wrapp'd up in apathy to all that 's there ;
she had needed no dagger next morning .
the sturgeon leaps , and the wild - fowl feeds
of course i was one of the fellows they caught .
par moi , la douloureuse existence guerroie
amid the inattentive trees ,
with his morning - winged feet
pélé of the place of torment , pélé of the lake of fire .
but what wouldst thou ? " said arthur . she , " a change
a month or more hath she been dead ,
though faded , and the lands , where lately waved
but the unsleeping spirits of dreamers ,
hills where once my love and i
floats ( as it were ) upon the sea , { 83 } iron bound with a wall
and bring it to you , with a cup of tea . "
while on the sandy stretches by the waters
exchange our mutual breathing vow .
and thus fulofte hirself sche skiereth
child and father , we grow old
and sable stole of cypres lawn
and to your hopes success will give .
then when he was all dight he tooke his way
to see her cousin she cam ' there ;
then circle me , then look me through ,
and high above the golden hill
keep her in heart and hand
only the beautiful and innocent
good deeds suffice not .   and if so , what sun
whose birth was northward ?   wot we not
and swore the dog had lost his wits
he drew the new - born creature from the wave ;
the frozen fount is hooped with pearl ;
contempt of earth and aspect up to heaven ,
yon wandering psalterist of the sky ,
lighting up the precipice
mark her distracted daughter seize
the flowering glade fell level where they mov'd ,
" couleurs , suivi de choses anciennes . "
through all the grove his slender ditty sweet .
as that bold paynim lord , would better speed ;
the vulgar flourish like a weed ,
but , above all the rest , his brother dear
he could not comprehend at all
interpret : therewith vent thy rage , if rage
shall float again to - morrow .
and , though there are who deem that same a low street
thou pretty baby , born here ,
are oft our age 's gall !
as never man loved woman heretofore :
scourged most with unrelenting stroke on stroke
a moment musing ; then he turned his look
next , when those lawny films i see
and anxious ( helpless as he lies , and bare )
the body left , they fled ; yet of them all ,
the garden,--with its heat one twinge
what hand has passed , that i should know
and after him the children pressed ;
what e'er birds did or dreamed , this bird could say .
legs wide , arms locked behind ,
i know i shall be glad ,
his short thick neck can not be easily harm'd ;
bowed down your brooding , silent head ,
he beheld the trees in blossom .
abruptly turned and took a fitful start ,
to play with baby and o. n. t.
that the river may not wet me ! "
i could have touched !
with mortal sting : about her middle round
heo is parvenke of prouesse ,
had wonder'd at the work . but blame him not ,
in telegraphic sentences , half nodded to their friends ,
where'er their march : no steed will he
and thus sche , which was al honeste
filled ráma with unrest ,
and with his foot the furious peer would throw :
to the indian maiden thinking ,
and gun or carbine on thy shoulder lay ,
that it less strange may seem , these are not towers ,
the man said to me , “ arrah , pat ! where ’s the sheep now ? ”
that can slip thy courser 's bridle ,
they hope to see no meadow , vale , or hill
a groan from his proud heart , and thus he said .
is woman -- sister , wife , and mother--
is preparing the birth of her brood .
and yet , my heart 's best praising ,
love bridled fury , and revived of new
oh ! say not woman 's love is bought
much as ' twould glad me , often to see my daughter dear ,
oh , how the bids went up by leaps , by bounds !
have fallen in a stranger - land , the flowers
that he had ne'er begotten ! thou descend'st
and minuets when anne was queen .
quae sunt in vestro pectore , saxa nocent .
on one another , as they strike athwart
then orthodoxy yet may prance ,
this year , young boys in umbro
but such arrangements time require ;
an ' runts o ' grace the pick an ' wale ,
a fable , a phantom , a show ,
now , to undisguise thee ,
as fell tydeides : shouted all the folk .
i 've had proposals by the yard--
her voice is all these tuneful fools admire ;
the robin pensive autumn cheer ,
thou teller of sweet tales , thine own ,
the master 's hand upon the cur 's cold chest
we glad accepted ; thus we feasting sat
forms like some bedlam statuary 's dream ,
society in which this type grew up has disappeared and left the
i should have died the instant that i heard
where the winds whisper and the waves rejoice .
haec mihi fingebam , quae nunc eurusque notusque
not beautiful , perhaps , in form and feature ,
rusty blackbirds , weak of wing ,
it 's _ so _ original -- clever -- and strong ;
all trebled horrors that wise odin may
that to serendib the same forms belong--
' twere strange did any see me / ever at court on ortlieb wait . "
there is no reason for supposing that he ever attempted practice :
this greeting the silent old clerk understands .
all radiant with the glory and the calm
to which our god himself is moon and sun ,
" hark you ! " shouted pau - puk - keewis
while another speaks and says :
and tender as a summer night ,
a greater opening ofttimes hedges up
thus , therefore , he is safe , and at his home
of such a multitude ? behold i here
well , that is strange :
' donec non alia magis
best it is to ask thy husband ,
" well , let it pass ; nor will i now
as sifted snow , could she endure
the visitor of such a scene .
he call'd his friend patroclus . he below
' neath the dark umbrageous shade ,
eumaeus elatus , while the stockman killed pisander . these all
yet never , never gleam of hope , and we were weary men .
o hierarch enrobed in timeless snows ,
by thy care . "
at last , after weary wanderings ,
lov'st thou me ?
they sang , that by his native bowers
our vessel , plunging deeper into night
more than does she who has written so much to you concerning it ,
concorde " and " in war - time , " by florence earle coates , from _ the
the thronging multitudes , their means devise
fourth of the cursed knot of hags is shee ,
" nausicaa , what can your mother have been about , to have such a
that children clamber on his knee ,
and one more heart is calling ,
curious work , meantime , re - entering society : how we
there where much lamentation strikes upon me .
and drink the success of the traveling man ,
but no one knew his rank or station ,
her cedar fir , hewed stones , and gold were all
i wish to have none other books
old dobson 's preaching ,
open watchman of the gate ,
worrying the little girl , " she said to the boy .
that to the ends of earth the sound went forth .
i gave him some garters ,
but answering another voice ,
_ resident _ , remaining .
is a juice that frees thy heart from a hundred pains .
sensible present .   yet if heaven 's great lord ,
and pleasant - pastured hills rise sweet with thyme ,
our warders , fed with power so long ,
to gardens laugh -- with daylight shine ,
sweeping plain and height .
the sable carpet , upon which , instantly afterward , fell prostrate
the gusty blossom , that tosses and swings ,
thrust elbow - deep in moss , that sure did weep
as the storms the forests tear ,
what direction did she journey ?
down into the pond among them
proscribed the bard whose name for evermore
should prove a bitter morsel , and his bane ,
" my sire is of a noble line ,
" there are no millers any more , "
while my hands tremble ? then my soul , instead
the romans , rulers of the land and sea .
just off the coast of an isle that lies
by the sanctuary stream ,
all thy children in one day :
thus oft reclined at ease , i lose an hour
and so allowes what it denies .
the blow is struck -- the winds of death have blown !
and gin 'em both her blessin ' .
poor little orphan child !
the line of lights , too , up to charing cross ,
the same sweet notes and die away,--
and here she summon'd baba , and required
as children when , with heavy tread
so i called aloud to the one within :
your form is bowed as is the wind - swept grass ?
and goodly on criseyde she biheld ,
and then sat coolly wiping his thumbs .
and , when you come to rhineland , speak but my bidding there ,
worse than the sin the curse it leaves behind :
" nasty mean thing to threaten . "
and that is the meaning of empire day .
had slumbered there till the charmed hour ;
because his words beguile me :
i with my misery worn , and faint
she 's swingein ' through the city ;
then down the road his vigour tried ,
his chronicle with curses fit .
---- the seaside and the fireside . 1 vol . 16mo . 75 cts .
cried out for anger , and his hair he tore .
shall i subscribe with pencil , pen or graver ?
but , o my god , that madest me to feel ,
making an unceremonious call ,
perhaps in some long twilight hour ,
command , pursue my ease , which can not be pleasing unless in your
seem'd from her visage shining , thus began :
and saft winds rusle ;
and merged her rose - red beauty in july ,
' yont , beyond .
and live the great , green life of field and orchard !
hardly thy life clear forth of heaven was sent ,
anything i can get you ? but it does n't matter , does it ? all that
to live in the life i vowed . "
if of herself she will not love ,
lord , vouchsafe me every day
and this our footsteps so infrequent made ,
his hand to execute what his decree
and there lay them safe and sound ;
that 's out of custom bred ,
not less nor more , but even that word alone .
the little dog died when he 'd had his day .
the silence of the bridal bed .
i am the poet of the woman the same as the man ,
abundantly renown'd , " the shade reply'd ,
i 'd ha ' left it for ' is sake--
the vaulted tomb , discover'd not by sight ,
it was the limit of my dream ,
the time is now !   call in , o call
whose ground is but the scum of frothy braines
it is -- i have forgot the name--
but minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their
on his body iron armor ,
within the blessed bouris o ' heaven ,
that ever feasted monarch , and , if ' twere otherwise ,
" all 's over , sweet , " he cried
triple sails , and masts , and rigging ,
all are nat in bed whiche shall haue yll rest
the tyrant who delights in ill .
who god doth late and early pray
in terra linquit , alium sub terra locat .
let not ambition mock their useful toil ,
but widely then from nature 's ends they err ,
“ ako bi te u pjesmu pjevala ,
the long black passage up to bed .
those ten men 's mules in stall he bade them tie .
to follow thee , dear anchoret .
i throw myself upon your breast my father ,
dama , oh no , che le sia pari .
as never man might seek to know
by that same god whom thou didst never know ,
where spring and lovers meet ?
straightway hastes he to the smithy
which now achilles , on his friend 's behalf ,
if e'er it stir , yield but a dim delight ,
but , like a virtuous medicine , self - diffused
to place upon his loyal brow ,
if ' twas tuoni brought you hither ,
in the cherry pluckt at night ,
of persia 's warriors on the hills of thrace ,
and , rustling , chime to the tinkling rime
no , there is not a dawn in eastern skies
we heeded not the fountain near ,
spicy wafts from arcady
to chiron , there , when nearer him we come .
with a snare that i can see not . "
how t'was a towmond auld , sin ' lint was i ' the bell .
i hardly dare . . . yet , only you to see ,
no such thing as gratitude left in this world . "
lest we forget -- lest we forget !
never harm thy weakest fellow ,
they are living in us whose glorious race will not die --
and sees with organs not her own ;
" i did that pretty well , " he said , approvingly . " pity those babes
and why is all the house so drear ,
a law for the earth , and the kingdoms above ,
oh , come , my baby , do ;
otia divitiis arabum liberrima muto . ]
gentle thoughts and calm desires ,
or those who manicure or fashion dresses ,
opinion that everything must be active or must suffer . . . . an
vacant , but thou retake it , mine again ! '
we ca n't show much in the way of fun
after mine eyes had with meek reverence
which many a prayer had heard and many a pun--
and as molten lead were the tears we shed
and the milkweed thick at my feet ,
of swift removal , seconds my desires .
' neath the roots of two great tree - stumps ,
love 's slow consuming flame .
splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat ,
be heir to those who are now exanimate .
as for me , to a jovial resort i 'd repair ,
and they found me there with me maxim gun ,
for thou getest none of me . ’
all has its date below .   the fatal hour
i think , she said at first ,
this comfort of thy dire misfortune take :
mouthings of a mountebank .
my spirit , that incumber'd with its frame ,
comparison between the poets before and since
who when by strong conviction pained ,
i knew that one had made her thrall ,
wept , groaned , desponded , sigh'd , and wept again .
for matthew 's course was bright ;
we , o'er the shades thrown prostrate by the brunt
my throne to hers shall go ;
when at our wake you for the chaplet ran :
under the orchard - trees and down the path to the meadows ;
ae night fell asleep a wee piece frae the shore ,
the hills are white wi ' snaw ,
is flaking and peeling :
and ilka day 's a clashing o't :
that mansion fell in avalanche ,
the rabbi leaped with the death - angel 's sword ,
and sat as still as a statue of stone ;
for there the judges all are just ,
rocked to eastward , rocked to westward ,
o not long after would their frames lie prone
said the white one , " i want to play hide and go seek ,
born with one sun , to live and to decline ,
is emptier than a prince 's promises--
when they meet with an obstacle , mount to the sky ,
no doubt will think this is the story 's end ;
leave the copses to the stranger ,
that steep and narrow scale admits to climb .
the mountain 's hidden treasury .
he 'd venture the gallows for siller ,
' tis _ her _ voice ; yes , i know ,
robert browning 's message , 3 .
but , as cicero says he wo n't say this or that ,
the dust is whirling with the dust . '
" yet with these april sunsets , that somehow recall
in equanimity they never dwell ,
the city of the phaeacians , and ask for the house of my
are you happy ?
and he added,--
though his pace he checked and slackened
overhead , of the wheeling gulls ,
king crida 's hosts axe storming carduel !
where vultures guard a serpent 's home ,
my little hopes of worldly gain i fret not at ,
i should have guess'd that all the heights sublime ,
and strong and humbled eyes .
no single heart ' twill win for thee ;
the babe drops dreamward in its resting - place ,
immortal be the verse , forgot the author 's name .
if providence divine were not triumphant .
for our especial glory , must we creep
and ev'ry power and omen of the sky
yet still though you are far away
to - morrow i 'll be sailing low ,
hymn for my brother 's ordination
and shiver'd all the beauty of my glass ,
does not at first appear ;
while the drums roared and rolled and beat
or a cloudy violet clearing to blue ,
o no , o no , they hurry down
alliterative--
whose woe is grown wealth and delight .
" of your condition make us cognisant . "
with farewells smooth and kind ;
didst thou not say this folly long had slept ?
answers but the resuming flow
" oh , the lazy days of boyhood , when the
then the king , i understand ,
new jason will he be , of whom we read
float from the east , o silver world ,
a thousand fainting gardens , are refreshed ;
caeca suis lacrymis haec sine sole suo .
the real man , conceal'd till that moment beneath
and , at each end , a solitary mountain .
_ ashley _ : " brought what on ? "
and my hand i would not offer .
except you go with me to see the king . "
each tiller there with love - epistles lined .
fought all his battles o'er again ,
" elenor found in me
you take my rooks with yours , and then checkmate !
then thou have pity ! for thou art an angel !
with love and _ mo bhuachaill _ for me ,
happy am i that sing of love ,
i 'd scarce a beard upon my face ,
in his jacket so worn and old ;
( though stronger far than thou ) this hero meets
an ' the harebell an ' the violet adorn'd ilk bonnie shaw ;
if he had known exactly his own plight ,
next the sullen - hearted , who rashly with else - innocent hand
him , and he will smilingly tell you of trials and
( as oft we note ) , even when they 've ceased to grasp
sacred shall be the purport of her days ,
" blessed the merciful , " and " happy thou !
and their precious precious blood ,
the slanter game i 'd played wiv my doreen--
chorus.--beyond thee , dearie , beyond thee , dearie ,
" nor have we stores of powder or food enough ! "
will never sit there again .
with the false tissue of deep - seeming life ;
as the cordage yields to my playful grasp,--
thou dost not break .   but lo ! a spirit there
  i am not sure of the real meaning of the name
our cottagers from fear relieved ,
steadily from the outside ring ,
in darkness the loud sea makes moan ;
press along the trail ! "
and the skill'd steering of a sober brain ,
o he did dress his children fair ,
for scarce had he cast anchor ere the road
then they said to him , " fool !   do you cast aside
on his war - seamed face .
slap .
we made use of what we had ,
handy by ;
and tremble though they love to hear ;
flow still between us , thou wide roaring main ;
in his far distant home ,
comes on the world , i , coming , cross with thee ,
that the intrigue was carried on and had even reached its second
and ever their quarry would vanish away ,
and think,--"now i 'll
how we field the horns of the cattle , and how
self - shapes its objects and subdues the fates--
you will not stir ,
entre pardos nubarrones
when good king arthur ruled his land .
still here and there some advocate
how beautiful she look'd ! her conscious heart
and i knew the voice ; not a sweeter
whose grandsire was th ' unhappy king of troy ;
and the night 's naked , ethiope minions
oppressed with bitter bondage and their lives
that wanted the crown ;
from an impostor , who usurps my throne ! "
oft let remembrance sooth his mind
{ opondylous } , or vertebræ of the neck.--see villoisson.]--tr .
to buy a garland for my love to - day .
i play with beauty , which is kin to art ,
on rávaṇ , and his town , and all . ”
a shade majestic , to the world below ,
cramps his spirit , crowds its all in little ,
' ead serang -- the chief ; the leader .
appointed for her handmaids , tended on her .
for if thou tarry we shall meet again ,
she has a beauty of her own ,
our ships , at least a prize not lightly won .
with strange precipitation .
man should with virtue arm'd and hearten'd be ,
through the silence , one by one
while we , the brave , the mighty , and the wise ,
longed sadly to embrace thee ;
if you will pull me up , he cried ,
but those that outcast them this night !
that in colored succession
the year - old cart - tracks perfect in the mire ,
a darling as you ?
the benefit was indeed great ; he had rescued ireland from a very
the taper of enchanted power .
es la voz funeral de una campana ;
oppress the weak and helpless still ?
in the days when not all men knew ,
which by and by black night doth take away ,
' for the stays and stanchions taut ,
ho ! then , the trumpet ,
in autumn sweeps the thistles o'er the field ,
when thine own star the solemn ray denied ,
i should answer , i should tell you ,
and that thou put me not to further speech ,
sorrow - laden , thus enchanted ,
experience is the chief philosopher ,
each thing on the earth owned a master 's command .
" observe me well .   i am , in sooth , i am
as others were -- i have not seen
should not find the " disjecti membra poetae . "--bowles .
crazed as he is , and by the stroke of jove
" brunettes , and the banyan 's shadow ,
steps forth in my defence .
the ship lay on her broadside ; the wind 's sound
of the franks and false king clovis ! "
so , evil falls , and a fool foretells the truth .
and trouble me no more . "
i am waiting for the flowers
and showed me , with a multitude of argument ,
headlands stood out into the moonlit deep
dance your bit dancie .
their courage still was high .
though bankrupt in joy , still my life has its gain ;
and ' mang her favourites admit you !
and he read her a little homily
my breath to heaven like vapor goes :
let those that love to dream or sleep
harmonie to behold in wedded pair
mayst enter . "
there was no sound save the ebb and flow
since the creator his exile doomed .
were all their windows level with the faces of the poor ?
went trickling downward through each vein .
lone cells . and while thou showest the calm life
your memories rising glide silently by me .
his infant steps returning , peel
where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap ,
she answered with a smile so bright and calm
by matchie manitou . all clothed
a weather - beaten sign - board
as we run men down today .
of agramant , stood silent , and agreed ,
while then canst speak with such a tone !
with double potence of the black and white .
for they of weighty matter shall possess thee .
therfore let euery man hym selfe refrayne
child of my soul , o whither now ,
it seems that the elk out of pride staid away ,
would have ordained , but with wild rite ,
too much fault ; for through this habit
wilt thou devise in thy heart ? how durst thou come down to
firm and unyielding .   oh thou pisa ! shame
i mounted , and we passed over the lone
and make the prayer seem very long ?
found no great throne to dazzle his mother 's eye .
they had killed and eaten , and playing draughts in front of the
if e'er it chanced , as sometimes chance it must ,
may bow to - morrow to great louis ' sway .
beneath my bower renews the wonted sign .
there , soon , the portico , the court , the hall
i 've learned to prize the , 39 .
then thus the king of men the contest ends :
all joys and wonders of old lives and new
forth to the haven of thy desire and dread ,
that every maner womman that was there
to live the traits of which i brag ;
i hate those let - ters . they twist and turn .
with his toothless gums and his vacant stare ,
with a weight at the end .
then up ! then up ! be firm -- be bold--
all the malice and the mischief ,
yet leapt he up all eager to contend
the pang of a new life in my breast ,
o risen moon !   o holy moon !
that eclectic old man of port grigor .
through the hazy air , past the brazier flaring
we wear a face of joy , because
he speaks well of nothing but what is his own . )
soon as his store of flying fates was spent .
fearing the storm prone fell the host to earth
thou maist pretend within my breast to bide ,
to whom love and desire and sorrow are foolishness
and grows a river down through verdant pastures .
vict . ( without ) .   chispa !
and old king cole , with many a puff
who lest himself hath litel wonne ,
rinaldo 's pilot left , and took the right ;
the suitors , that she might make them still more enamoured of
frederick the grave , landgrave of thuringia and margrave of
he said--"the season is almost run ;
in the days that are gone , they were laid ' neath the willow ,
spite of your chosen part ,
but dwelt in such quiet and plenty
the sleeping larks i waken
as quick a growth to meet decay ,
he met a coachman driving a coach
out of the towne come quarries thick as haile ;
the hostile mountains from the passes fling
fine acquaint wi ' her weel - soopled jaw ,
than here to have incurr'd this public shame !
and sees both comfortless , both black--
to her death by fire and water ,
lately released from newgate , hath great skill
that whan men wolden vertu seke ,
i am ashamed of my own self ; and yet true it is , if disgraceful ,
whose young and half transparent leaves scarce cast
within them every lower faculty
he is not sold ;
upon thee have stretched his hand . but the incredible thing made
_ that have wandered out of hell , _
en otra edad divino ;
where the wide heath in purple pride extends ,
and turn his eyes away ?
as if they were his nurse :
snapp'd in the strength of the divine desire
ready the foemen 's van to face ,
for the old , ' ard - workin ' poor .
' twas not the genuine ray of hope , it flashed
who herself is a name despised , a rejected name ?
blotted away from our eyes forever ,
it came from tauris , from the altars red
in time of war ' twill never lag ;
owd moxy wrowt hard for his morsil o ' breead ,
injurious to you , go ye forth yourselves ,
a sun upon the world , as duly this
triumphs through life , from legal judgment free ,
thus oft to rest , if haply she might feel
and oh , we feel thy presence here ,
sometimes amid the swift melodious dance
an old story
as he which al a flatour was ,
and what arcadian helpers bring'st thou here ?
then blooms each thing , then maids dance in a ring ;
last night the angel of remembrance brought
each one mounting a gallant steed
of life and immortality . and john
sark , a shirt .
and we on some processional
and a fortune like joe 's is n't given
and at length upon the third day ,
or groom invade me with defying front
and nought but the nightingale 's song in the grove :
our reason made right and hearts all love .
as your mind reviews the day :
shorter henceforward will my language fall
this way and that , soliciting the dart ,
lov'st thou to sport upon the watery gleam ?
as down on her haunches she shuddered and sank .
i 'm good to - day , and so i 've come to see if it is true
gentlefolks , in my time , i 've made many a rhyme
all this throbbing , all this aching ,
crag over crag , and fell o'er fell .
despiciens mare velivolum terrasque iacentis
i think of you , faithful soldiers ;
and she moves to and fro with the speed of the wind .
of continual woes and cares :
" that 's , certainly , a messenger for _ me_;--
from scylla and charybdis dire escaped ,
barbarus has segetes ? en quo discordia civis
that fosters the first rose ,
as though the great black hills against the sky
but now my task is smoothly done :
entreat me not , dear reader , to impart
and more particularly so to - night )
thou threwest away thine angry lyre ;
in low dark rounds the arches hung ,
for unto each has been divided off
yet half i seemed to recognize some trick
i screamed to feel it touch the sky .
speaks these words of ancient wisdom :
murdered , within the space of nine days . "
ye trusted in your hieland men ,
she rose , she heaved her hands up , and waxed red
upon her outstretch'd arm , a fearless bird ,
explores his solitary flight ; som times
but she tries to force back her sorrow
you count yourself as nothing !
with sullen - seeming care that erst was gay .
with grief , across the furrows on soiled feet
savour she hath of a world undreamt ,
in haste the stripling to his side
on christmas day in the morning .
so fierce his looks , so terrible his cries ;
scenting , blow the triple team ;
fair desdemona must despise :
yea , now indeed the earthly life o'erpast
her eyes where shining brighter than the star ;
and , as at the circus there 's nothing attracts
“ unthankful or forgetful ? that i speak ,
being so called from its name , because it blows from the east . as
for the boy that was our baby has stepped
and the tears down either cheek .
in cries ecstatic , as of the martyr - blest ,
together there you 'll sing , we 're saved by grace ,
and love to live in dimple sleek ;
o promiscuous wind .
'cause another 's rosy are ?
hurl’d headlong flaming from th ethereal sky ,
an honest love , and not afraid to frown .
these flames that would eclipse it , dark as blots
or a leaving home ; or later ,
on a soft bed of sponge in the deep sea i lie ,
from the icy bridge of the northern seas , which the white
` beth nought agast ; ' but certeyn , at the laste ,
wasna , _ was not _ .
and bid her wake to pain :
the wise king will not show himself too bold
we see them not , but if by chance we stray
flashes past the face of god , and is a star .
no gaudy ware like gandolf 's second line--
a canvas where fancy her mad brush may try ,
cast them aside , and good riddance to rubbish !
abroad , but in edinburgh town .   nothing can be less probable than
she took the cloistral flesh , the sexual veil ,
and round him the wild woodland throngs
but then the risk was all my own ;
an ' white 's mah hair ;
while dimpled cheeks , and sparkling rolling eyes ,
latter instance from tasso ( as if god had never another messenger
and he his mistress dear ,
there oft the indian herdsman shunning heate
said ida ; ' home ! to horse ! ' and fled , as flies
laurel and myrtle , and what higher grew
the years are many that have pass'd away ,
his kiss was not so wonderful
and as to that old - fashioned virgin the moon ,
to gain the mystic crown , must cry the truth .
sevocat a doctis , ortale , virginibus , etc .
  _ chosen vessel _ : paul , who like aeneas visited the other world ,
said , " sit , holy sister ! your worth is well known
but in her heart beneath the outward guise ,
for yet awhile
and golden coin , and golden cup ,
like him there is nane , donald ;
too closely press the verge .   accurst be thou !
solid gold is grown ;
" the shoes that the may - blooms kissed on thee
we will cheer for a signal at the flagship 's mast--
waiting for a partner ,
" only project beyond the bound
caccianimico venedico , xviii . 50 .
and so i 'm sitting on the bench , my spirits sort o ' low ,
dismiss thy terrors , go thy ways , my son ,
what lingering strength mine age attends .
i saw at once that she was charming .
up in sahri lived a maiden ,
and shall i not give mine ?
and flowers and children close their eyes
forge the summer hoofs for horses ,
such letters of pain and pine
pygmalion , whom his gluttonous thirst of gold
and speed the long night faster .
to serve me faithful without wage ,
look at her garments
lie dead in the dark together
that taught me love of one thing more divine .
as soon as asked , the warrior repossest .
our ships with ease transport thee in a day .
and in the field of destiny
bade him enter at the doorway ,
and bare threescore is all even that can boast ,
desireth forto do plesance
¡ oh ! ¡ despertad mortales !
i care na thy daddie , his lands and his money ,
and one of them , not this one who was speaking ,
thus the smith addresses iron :
beware from right to swerve .
he is at peace - this wretched man -
“ o let me hew this single tree ,
here 's deer - skins , for a carpet , smooth and meek .
gives life to some new grace ; thus doth h ' invoke
and sleep the forgiving ,
tu quoque si quando uenies ad fata , memento ,
in the silence before rain
before or since he to the tree was nailed .
however , things may yet prove better:--
haste , while it gloweth ,
are footpaths for the thought of italy !
and in our crystal streams
but on the grave - mound of menoetius ' son
there never trembles a sigh of regret ,
tell me whether you be these fugitives ' magistrate , father ,
sthúláksha ’s eyes with arrows filled ,
into his councils crafty knaves at home ,
to buy him some shoes ,
two boys together ,
here storms beat wildly ;
to plough land in the fall for winter - sown crops ,
( letter lxv ) .
seiz'd on each arm ( while deep in either cheek
and , while thus husht she lies ,
‘ have no doute , mayster , ’ sayd lytell johan ,
the shaft from a cross - bow less swiftly had vanished !
night is growing gray ,
to a fluttering heart at rest ,
aphelia 's are the airy feet .
unless thy features do belie thee much ,
this wretch , his warrior tribe ’s disgrace
a just deed in the world?--call out
it is ynouh to do the lawe .
and there to danish pilgrims give
* a star was discovered by tycho brahe which appeared
on her head a golden head - dress ,
few men knew mair or better ,
display not there the barbarous rites
deniq ; sit quidvis simplex duntaxat & unum .
as pale as formal candles lit by day ;
a man that 's too good to be lost you ,
the budding twigs spread out their fan
so that his lyf be saved , at the leste ;
this gave them joy indeed , yet more of pain .
through lonely plains or secret forest depths ,
stuffing of wild yearnings , hopeless tenderness , and a general
" sacred to ridicule ! "
without some borrowed traits , to make
some love with dealers dark to dwell ,
and when we came to clovenford ,
and proudly wear where'er they roam
heard the rivulet rippling near him ,
in the firmament of ether ,
to be beauty 's sacrifice .
of an italian theatre , storied , seer
enclosure between the city - wall and the gate .
spreads to all future rector - kind ,
amid the whirr of wheels and are the seed
the wonder of the company ,
you 're just as wonderful as i ,
what kaṇdu(929 ) spoke in ancient verse ,
adam was years five score .
which ebbed away , one evening , on the sly ,
in that young church . their worldly means were ample
and what i thought and think , would be professed
a skin so white , that neuer did his eie
heaven 's light--
_ then _ you could toot your horns and beat
calling , and hail them by dead names ,
then spake again with fell and spiteful heart ,
in to the life that somewhere else you lead .
and we are fain to weep as children weep
tu nihil magnum sinis interire ,
and they felt it rising , rising ,
the wild laments , companions old of death
red granite , and quartz ; in the alchemic sun ,
naught passes between us ,
  dryden 's aurengzebe :
fairest in days to come , alike are ours :
the sigh that 's breath'd for one to hear ,
had nothing on this youngster in the dodging of a spree .
to the shark and the sheering gull .
says harry hunt , ‘ i ’ll lay my head
she wears _ balmorals _ .
climbed for , and plucked the very instant , look you ,
a chorus of ready cheer ,
when the winged beast has lost baiardo 's traces .
the revolving cycles in their wide sweep having brought me again ,
does mow the flowring herbes and goodly things ,
calm implacable queen of the east
but , no ! zenobia was like ' most any other lady--
what old december 's bareness every where !
his thoughts are the hymns of the praise of things ,
_ the strains unlike _ , _ and how unlike their fate _ !
news - papers , yet my reader may be pleased to see it better told .
for ever and anon comes indigestion ,
and the forms , in the limitless white
besides the blackest fiddlers of those days ,
in active zeal and order too ,
you will ne'er to the foeman yield .
now , clothed in majesty , you move a god ! "
who lieth here ?
translations of this book were first made by roman catholic
ever and ever , before my happiness .
tear off his verbiage and skin him
unto the region of the highest thunder ,
well - known hymn , seems to have been objected to in some quarters ,
while hope 's fond whispers struggle with despair :
free will depends , is " the specific virtue " of the soul .
four things a man must learn to do
nor any sound or rumour , save
gay cino , of quick laughter ,
" come in!"--the mayor cried , looking bigger :
“ what transports i enjoy'd ! what true delight
they brave the terrors of the dreary flood ,
had he not turned already on their herd .
dropping on the ripened grain ;
fear not , for i to victory will pursue ,
pretending she loves me hard ;
in fervent prayer before his father , god .
what is his lightning to my delia 's eyes ?
nor dusk 's gold canvas , where one star 's white flame
to soften your limbs in relaxed postures ,
hills , hills of song , springs of eternal bloom ,
ere nescience shall be reaffirmed
i will sequester the elizian plains .
a thousands days
whose smiles of love are seen through broken tears ,
cyfarf wyf a rhwyf , rhudd lafnau yngnif ,
where both of us of siegfried foul treason hath bereft .
the great reform act doth appear .
the brutish gods of nile as fast ,
_ largo e mesto _
( haec mea musa leuis gloria magna tua est ) ,
nor ' mong the mountains that enfold
and why not this , if they ?
the mystic boats for the dead .
because the priest is born a peaceful slave .
withstanding entrance unto me .
who did in honour far surmount
is bursting from the ground ;
other desires and other hopes beset me ,
from the torn dulse 's .
may not harm my ship of magic . "
cold grow the sunburnt bodies and the white :
whose pasturing clouds in the soul 's atmosphere
all my life 's sweet consists in her alone ;
sing of the end of troy , and of that flood
now more happy times we have ,
vouchsafed or sought ; for what peace will be given
our love perhaps had been less intense ;
here always wish her golden star to glow !
what dismal tidings for quebec ,
who need no wine to make them drunk ,
  [ the brass eagle which was fished out of the lake at newstead in
and we d the enamour'd oxygene to light.--
anointing , clothe him in immortal robes .
inspir'st , mak'st glorious and long - liv'd , as they
the frog has changed his yellow vest ,
with tongues of gold , & to the ground
where all looks flowery , wild , and sweet ,
when i conceived my expiation in my womb ! "
speak unto , and thus addressed him :
and wearily resume his daily round
do they endure ; and therefore evermore
a village chorus is supposed to be assembled , and about to
" it is written in a strain which must of necessity appeal to the
his luiks grew kene , as they were wo nt ,
where hell 's capacious cauldron is set on :
but in his heart he bore a talisman
yet here , where plovers nightly call
wherefore i chose my portion .   if at whiles
yet wavered oft , and flew
that he was to be buried , and alive ,
but their prescriptions did not do ;
and to her auld husband he 's carried her back ,
" lo ! naught contents thee , who content'st not me . "
of joy , xwhen mis'ry is at hand ! ]
now kindling thro ' each pulse and vein
but i slowly thrived and prospered , tel mother used to say
the nakit shift ,
formed from similar living fibres , and are varied by
an ' caze he never look ahead ,
strews all its honours on the earth beneath ;
heav'n did a recompense as largely send :
what time we razed old ayton tower . "
" who knows , perhaps some lion or some wolf ,
compare , also , chaucer 's _ fortune _ ( " _ balades de visage sanz
an ' ye were martin elginbrod ! "
and icy cold he turned away .
so bring me now my harness , and i 'll with hagan fight . "
virtue should dwell and opulence ; but heav'n
cernere facundi tibur glaciale vopisci
and there came streaming out in slow procession
no seal is on the yankee 's mouth ,
wid ' er nose all hooked an ' skin all dry .
hemlock and beech and chestnut .   here and there
elaborate manoeuvres afterwards celebrated in rome as the " trojan
seized on the plain and forced them to the hills
why had she thrilled
circles the hill .   his words so spurr'd me on ,
therefore , since to the body avail not riches , avails not
oh , but it grieved the gentle prior sore ,
quick as legs of foals are moving ,
for on the side it slants , and most the height
which flew before , the herald of his fame ;
and shivering in my nakedness ,
" i still , though conscience urged , no step advanced .
wearied the elder brother , and he said ,
for indra ’s peer in might is he ,
that blow did bail it from the deep unrest
her tenth step to the ground , when with mine eyes
the true home rises in our thought ,
are driven away
meant for your marriage , which the rain
life is a ponderous lesson book , and fate
are there no beggars at your gate ,
cloudy are the days and misty .
all that the best can mingle and express
infinite is the ocean
white o'er the linns the burnie pours ,
from their just lords the christian lands to wrest !
and hold them bound . wherefore again , again ,
which hath the wyndes of tempeste
down on your knees , dog ; them we love we chasten .
os astros .     the stars .                thi esters .
to collect dried poles of brushwood ,
in doom and love already made his mate ,
the voice of the master calling ?
to earth ’s great granaries — i bring not these .
heterogeneous in metrical poetry ; and , vice versa , whether in the
whatever mischief seemed
so glorious and bright ,
or breathes through air , or shoots beneath the deeps ,
the law expressly properly declare ,
reddam , quod potero , plenas pro munere gratis .
which passeth from his brightness ; not disjoin'd
miss katydid rendered a song of her own ,
and the ways of other households .
low voiced , she sang . so sweet the idle song ,
the chipping - sparrow , in her coat of brown ,
in small - eyed china 's crockery - ware metropolis ,
they know , who for her sake have life refus'd .
  after his flight from rome catiline betook himself to
to hasten on as well they may
within twenty miles ' distance of newry .
--like the verbum graecum
i 'll tell you a story
when the beautiful hue
here when the cloudless april days begin ,
when i reached the street with the genial major ,
and we are getting on ;
clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees ,
next , when i have my faults confessed ,
the dummy president of the wagon works
to the joy of morn arising .
out of our evil seek to bring forth good ,
to light a lover to the pillow
breathed into the air his sorrow ;
whiche dispysynge the counsayle of men of age
and kindred forms which laboured brass may bear !
a impulsos del terremoto .
father from daughter .   now you are all mine own .
last night my cheek was wetted with warm tears ,
and from the wilds was dragg'd to martyrdom ,
awake , awake from sleep !
our eyes behold a glorious land ,
perhaps from hearsay , or from recollection ;
fullgrown the helpful daughter of my heart ,
and lifting up the leaves display great drops of purple ink .
skilled to appraise the tunnage of cranes
and middle natures , how they long to join ,
all clambering and stretching grey - pink palms .
still foremost let me stand to guard the throne ,
and in the east a cloud or two
supreme in the northland through thirty years
while i use of eyes enjoy and inward light of reason ,
some strain of music to thy mind ,
every one in his airy soar ,
through every storied hall
who was not very young , nor yet very old ,
ah , little ones , but if ye could forget
* for the full title of works cited see ` bibliography ' .
just to waltz , which he ne'er before tried .
the noble baron whet his courage hot ,
never more i may thee see .
so that , by rending , he tore off a tendon .
broad - browed heifer of a year old , unbroken , and never yet
the glorious hero ; how he voyaged and smote
while some struck senseless by his roar
not fierce othello in so loud a strain
had lost , and sadly missed her love .
blocks swing to their place , beetles drive home the beams:--
clouds of wrath the skies are veiling ,
to good virgilius , and he answered me
snow - balls oft were thrown into my prison —
do not let thy father scold her ,
and pluck the cover from thine hair ,
" but if you will not obey me ,
their rebel senses well controlled .
the treasure - palace wrought
across our happy gathering , you 'll forgive
are not to be hanged up . " - pepys .   colonel john carew , like
her he eyed :   his judgement was one word ,
deeply has sunk the lesson thou hast given ,
there sad old age and pale diseases dwell ,
of peace on earth , good - will to men !
and you 'll be free from all disease ;
spake the ancient wainamoinen :
wordsworth was to be a philosophic poet , and , by a good fortune
herself almost as tottering as they ;
thus it was that hiawatha
but thalaba leapt onward to the doors
may traytors ever be deceived
vhile a goot peas - poodin ' sausage
the h--- you say !
of fortune 's game , and the iniquitous hour ,
the shrill horn sounds , the courser flies ,
over the hills and far away
woodsville 's a place of shrieks and wandering lamps
a prince without a sword ,
great little one ! whose all - embracing birth
from each sequestered bathing - place ,
o'er the soft atmosphere of this temple of grace
she sees not its beams,--but in loneliness prays ,
splash , splash ! and in they go .
thousand - fold . "
nor fresh vermillion fade upon her face :
whil that the cite was aslepe ,
which i , in well - considered counts , should draw .
foreign tongue with the care essential to master its metrical
bedded in clay
reposed , they took their amorous delight .
one law for a living man ,
  { 26 } [ robert rushton , the son of one of the newstead tenants .
imaged the others gone before ,
the hour of time , and the delicious season ;
and the round sun rolling by
each nerve to strain , each bending oar to ply .
on empty windows . the watchful room
that sings as it passes
but , fearful of the rending shore ,
pallas courageous made , and from her limbs ,
involves his fate ; and she who urged the start
by the side of lonely moor ,
omnia tempus edax depascitur , omnia carpit
i oft have heard the people say ,
_ this turk he had , & c. _
was it from fragrance 's own womb , or from
for that lady loved her lord
nine drops of water bead the jessamine ,
the hill and tree for sword and spear ,
for if you join the english ranks ,
then , not to make them sadder , i kept down
till her mouth was sweet with the south .
but blame us women not , if some appear
stained the youthful nation 's annals .
and there the river by whose brink
nor thy disastrous fate , sabellus ! tell ,
hung on their blushes warm and meek ,
so boyhood sets :   comes youth ,
  the favourite author of the elder corneille .
while others kindle into martial rage
to treasure in memory all that your voice
exiles and wanderers now , where'er ye go ,
and , like a thousand serpents intercoiled ,
i know i can reach the hilltops high .
i dream of thee and those fair heavens bright .
for us , what , after all , would be the gain
wandering companionless
man began to reign . "
crackin ' hicker'-nuts ; and warr'n
in threatening shape , with voice of fear ,
out of the path , and take the grass .
thy fall the fatal death - stab gave .
" te deum laudamus . give peace in our time , o lord . "
what some have found so sweet ;
the artful fox your wit commends ,
but dangers new , tofore unseen , appear ,
then spousal rites preiudge the marriage bed .
--¿tienes testigos ?
from her head in graceful tresses
the warme _ favonian _ winds with whistling gale
through all the body , so the mind alone
from my former battle - pleasures ,
their blunt ends frizzled like celery - tips ;
the lights of revel flash from arden 's halls ;
cast the man into the water ,
as when behind the cause they see the little place called home .
before i die for ever .
then schall erth apon erth haue a hard p{ar}tyng .
an ' yirks the tüne into the air
of the wind ; a mare his mother
all at once and nothing first--
our homes , our forests grand ,
eunice was very quiet all that day ,
a thief ? that mischief faun ! "
caesar supplies the weapon and bids strike
as we may now dispatch ; but otherwise
each side a swan was painted snowy white :
and though i knew her not , i vowed ( oh , hear ,
that the life he craved for was not to be found in america ,
but there 's never a bird , so sweet a song
to fill the frittered minutes of a day ,
and lie down wi ' my collier laddie .
jis 'bout de time de day was dawnin ' ,
and back came the water splashing
the faithful companion
there is ever a song that our hearts may hear--
when dancing to pate birnie .
how few somtimes may know , when thousands err .
our poop we turn'd , and for the witless flight
bird 's little babies .
and as he marked its close intent
what whets the knife
you saw to - day ?
and as the air , when saturate with showers ,
which starlike sparkle in their skies ; "
as the doughty monarch may deign to give . "
be this thy gift : that man henceforth
where art thou , worse to me than dead !
to walkë by his syde .
to a perfumed , perfect summer night ,
a painted mitre shades his furrowed brows .
are yet the fountain - light of all our day ,
nor watch'd the glorious shaker of the shores
resolved to trace so wondrous an event ,
that brave fra bastian was to paint your portrait .
thus the love - song was recorded ,
a skill préville could not disown .
and pass the gloomy nights of winter there ?
thou , our morrow 's pathway knowing
was a scarlet tanager .
if love inquire , ' where ? '
and by disdaining nature and her bounty .
in the little green orchard ;
' till white in ase they 're sobbin ' ;
elizabeth ! be true and steadfast ever !
to him was as the gates of paradise ;
against a wind - mill would'st thou try thy might ,
composition . the fabricator put thomas vaughan 's birth - place in
weeping and sore disquieted :
though scholars all , and rich in lands and gold .
some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate ,
timid for him who follows . so the bird ,
attaineth to erase those fancy - scrawls
so will i melt into a bath to wash them in my blood .
and yielding flood is all my arms enfold .
and find it faithful ?   here was rome for me ,
die augen täten ihm sinken ,
yet this much you 'll say for my verse ,
stood open wide , belching outrageous flame
the nightingales had flown ,
" adieu and -- au revoir-- " to night
morsel of supreme venison -- whose every fibre seems to murmur
or by unhappy vacancy of brain ,
the mountain brook is still
before the doors the eastern peoples stood
you smile , and you are thinking too ,
i have a little sofa
this winter air is keen and cold ,
continually . "
the fells rain - beaten ;
for us was builded by a power divine--
tha're mushroom fops , fra ' fields an ' shops ,
jes ' chokin ' full o ' hothouse plants and pinies and perfume ;
stood upon a spot unworthy ,
if in her general system , just to all ,
admonish'd , i the question urg'd no more ;
turns when the thwarting winds wax higher ,
lest they be thought to dwell in lonely spots
with its grave denizens , a mighty throng . "
had returned to comfort mother .
this is clear--
so gan the peyne hir hertes for to twiste ,
i longed to see the king : ’ twas hard
some mighty change , when plunder'd thrones agree ,
the whole .   and of such bond methinks i saw
whose touch at once all lingering sorrow calms ,
fail to think of ulysses , than whom there is no man more eager to
when good - night is good - bye ;
turn swift their various motions , or are turnd
and thus apart our hearts keep time
they also prevent them .
the power to make his toiling days
thou of mine ancient kin !
in christian lands the lamps burn bright ,
the scented manuscript must close .
into this chasm , and since they have not turned ,
the sun hadna peep'd frae behint the dark billow ,
in the least point the loftiest power .
thy anger grows slowly , for thou art great ,
de hablar de la desdicha ? en tantos años ,
urging the suit of his friend , explaining , persuading , expanding ;
all omens of the earth and air .
and phoebus ' self is less a god to me .
but now , " he may believe ; and yet , and yet
that through this lower world already thou hast sped ,
to both my parents then i flew--
should troy , to bribe me , bring forth all her store ,
has a fashion of wanting to settle things up .
ah , never to climb again ! "
for western countries , taking in her store :
two strangers who 'd kissed , or near ,
child of the sun .
whispering new joyes to the milde ocean ,
when nightingales sing .
see them gloat above their rennet !
" ' besides , if faith to helenus be due ,
what place is left for words of measured praise ,
but time is a river for ever in flow ,
and for himself he 'll set all these apart .
lett not my suppliant breath raise a rude storme
the glamour of the soul hath come upon me ,
afraid and glad -- nor durst he more to trust him to the spear ,
somewhat thereby , to loose king henries hold .
that made the lion servant of his will .
up from the meadows rich with corn ,
arabs of the whole wide girth
i lighted down my sword to draw ,
were prey too small,--whose dismal haunts were on
rairin , roaring .
oh rosa , say " good night ! " once more ,
on each nail hang bags of silver ,
still flourishing the auld pear tree
harold 's associated in his mind with latin .
and the good nokomis answered :
it 's all very well for you
i seem to soar until i seem
the word of the kings to give ?
its pathos clutches at my throat :
it dwells as high , it gleams as fair
see : he draws apart
' ay , the ship was mine ; but in that ship
shut thy wicked teeth in darkness ,
" down , rebels , down ! " the angry scotchmen cry ,
which narrow is , and somedeal long ; and where
and on the left hand of the hearth he saw
the startled horses swerving at the sound ;
' " but that 's the order to return the brig , " says boney . " is that
from the parrots translating the cry ,
while more preferred the lively air
they join'd to follow his example ;
how to cage the flying thoughts , my winged delight , for you ?
we pledge the commodore .
and cheerful turned to work anew .
who hath ruled in the greenwood long ;
o sweet pleaders?--doth my lot
soon my task will be completed ,
he did say it .
“ drink deep , or taste not the pierian spring,”--
of death 's dark cup with rose - red hue .
malacoda and other devils .
where there is hope for all and me .
the bold rutulian 's city , built of yore
on desperate revenge , that shall redound
through the bones , and through the muscles ,
are smiling in mirth at the mischief she 's done ;
hath taken ; whence i wand'ring by the shore
rue on thy despairing lover ,
at once the four spred out thir starrie wings
but lo ! a fresh puzzlement starts up to view--
to peril all he had upon the lead ,
he that hath found some fledged bird 's nest may know ,
riding on a rolling billow ,
from unmysterious ? things more elevate ,
come thou , who art the wine and wit , i. 238 .
each for himself works desperately ,
i have perceiv'd that to be with those i like is enough ,
rain !   o the glad refresher of the grain !
both of lost happiness and lasting pain
we hid it in the darkest place
our other home was for ever green ,
that sleep forgotten in the grave of time .
yet escaped destruction . ah , if thou couldst feel as i , and
of clipping from the paper ,
( that even for anger makes the lily pale ,
my lady rides to - day .
" this spot is destin'd for a future town , "
who knows what splendour of strange dreams was shed
behold how they toss their torches on high ,
with simple words of dulcet sound .
" whose heart - strings are a lute ; "
whereon the boat full quickly / the gallant knight made fast .
with bleeding , draught , or pill .
those solemn courtiers pacing to and fro
and round you make a may !
and fields that bloom in the heavenly gales
in their deep - sunken cell , and fasten'd then
that bliss to gain ? is virtue 's , then , unknown ?
who once demurred , now followed with acclaim :
and calm and steady , his small boat ready ,
while the sun smouldered in a great ravine ,
" my daughter , that enchanting gurl ,
regurging with the salt tides from the mouth ;
" bearest thou no tidings from our loved on earth ,
whole towns are cast away and wrecked ;
to counsel , traitors to dismay and foil ,
must we leave pride behind us , / as before brunhild we stand .
of wifely duty , when love cometh not
as if the soul that minute caught
answers oracular ,
cam ' delicately to the brink
or else you hear the rustle of skirts
i sit and read of joseph , in the land
as we drew slowly nearer ,
your town and citadel by the hands of your own people born in
right well they strike , olivier and rollant ,
the tender mother and the happy wife .
drawing imagination 's fervid theme ,
  memoirs of wordsworth , vol . ii . p. 221 .
flying and flying , lighted on the floor ,
apout dem now , py tam ?
it would be interesting to know where these birds go as winter
  unknown , save for this mention of him .
though you soar with the wings of the cherubim o'er us ,
settled on the neck and shoulders
than that your majesty hath all too well
nor ship , that tack'd by sign from land or star .
which sayeth " honor thy father and thy mother . "
the viceroy languidly confest
and unfit for me to live there .
seed for the coming days ; without revocation departeth
still to be powdered , still perfumed :
when there cam a yell o ' foreign squeels ,
lest he kill you with his cunning ! "
overtook him in the plains of jericho : and all his army were
but spread its wings and flew .
' let one go forth and see , lest the people be already
round us as we seaward passed ?
high on the decks with vast gigantic stride ,
some cloves -- the best of spices :
and courteis every hour ;
combination of the painful idea of sorrow with the
" the chymic mystery that gives endless gold .
from sunset and sunrise of all thy realm ,
a _ poilu _ with no face at all .
how does your garden grow ?
to his praise.--
that the poem , even in the present version of it , may not be
long will earth listen the rue of his dirging--
laws of form , and metre just ,
in the avenue .
in craven 's dens , on cumbrian heights ;
the luve o ' life 's young day !
" wilt thou for ever , even from the tomb ,
or perish , all may be , at least , forewarn'd .
of the free heaven into his room .
heard the summer calling , calling ,
with traces of acidity , acidity , when old ;
the sound of sobbing in the dark .
she loves not you nor me as all we love her .
go to the hill - side , neath the cypress - trees ,
before thy lover 's chamber ?
‘ to edinburgh to come and gang ,
what this wonder on the billows ?
just think of carolina 's sage
to one he loved in secret , and apart .
so , left thro ' their own little orbit to move ,
whence earth was kindled like as heaven in june
then hope not , while we journey on ,
united by tenderest bond !
quamuis candida milies puella
the gent fra his hall , the peasant fra his cot ,
those who shall flock to learn the precepts plain .
in each rushing , roaring torrent
but shall the senseless fop impart
" britannia ! thou among the during ones ,
therein his offspring first arose , born of his wife in the
what bells will ring when i am dead .
so there he stood , some help from her to gain ,
and who with green turfs rear his head ,
will say , i 'm confident ,
lies bare to light and dark ,
yellow before the doorway of my life ,
cras donaberis haedo ,
i sit , and the carriage rolls on with me
and find them lined with gold .
man mounts on man , on camels camels rush ,
o mihi curarum pretium non uile mearum ,
listen , the sound of the sea,--a token
a passage opens to the deadly flood .
the pregnant brain of mighty jove
heaven the judicious sharp spectator is
_ here lies the thorn - wound of the dawn
uiua uidens uiuo sepeliri uiscera busto .
( 12 ) cicero , on the contrary , suggests that the reason why the
' tis best the beaten path to keep ,
an ' to the muckle house repair ,
in streaming tears , bewail'd their numa dead .
the egg was laid from which he sprung ,
and share my meal , a welcome guest .
there was an old woman who lived in a shoe ,
she changed into a child !
he doth descend into a yogin house
for irma leese at twenty years had married
lies broad , we exiles sleep .
alas poor boy , he will never be better ( nor may be needs to be
( i wish he had been there to hear , )
( not caring so very much what she supposes ) ,
on the dunes of nagow wudjoo ,
in every hue of the blood - red sky ,
canto xxxvi . rávan ’s speech .
internal economy of the inns of court ; while numerous legal
from mankind in this wild--
the works of campbell and the rest
thick rise the spear - shafts o'er the land
of friendship , glad renewal of the surge
" fye on ye , women ! why ca ' ye me man ?
and britain to her hell return .
seem'd harder too ; but the soft river - breeze ,
_ little boy blue , come blow up your horn ... _
the palace all and towers / re - echoed from their blows ,
there , then , a while in chains we lay ,
and totter on in business to the last ;
whom death augments , and time can not make old .
now , son , dilates and now distends itself
and waited to be home again
call me away ,
he is only thus to be understood ; that lucilius had given a more
their lovely labours lay away ,
he sought the well - known spot .
my rosary of hours ,
jesus ! my love ! my treasure ! who
thou held by this nomadic tribe :
praise ! for the blessing is of thee !
and my cherished harp has vanished ,
calling in vain to prayer ,
grew bulky and quitted the stage .
" sad shall i be , so bereft ,
close covered on his breast .   and all her glowing
lies heaped in slumber , beast and man ;
leo , escorted by none else beside ,
and the tribesmen bellowed to hasten the food ;
that me and mine in everything
will die -- do aught but fly !
now what shall we talk of , my own dollies fair ?
this werre on honde hath undertake .
comparing faces , morning , noon ,
if we set a light for him .
i envy not the twelve ,
hast thou found the long - lost wisdom ,
and a man killed his friend ; they fought
it may be , and the sight be justly crav'd .
bring the prayer of a little one . "
brother , when i marry , what will come from you ?
and therefore pack hence to virginia for planters ,
thou , amid the dirgeful sound ,
phæacia 's sons , pleasant it is to hear
and he chooses ' twixt death from the foemen 's hand ,
you wait , expectant--
than making journeys hither / they better were at home ;
" thar was enos had good brandy - snaps ,
and the dead foliage flies in many a shapeless flake .
descending swift into the dreadful field ,
her slender form , her witching smile and grace .
if not within sight as the clock 's striking five ,
  hazlitt 's lectures on the english poets , 3rd ed . , p. 140 .
what brave endeavor to endure !
thou wear this corollary .   nature ever
with the burning darkness of eyes like pansies ,
where no print of step hath been ,
and dies among his worshippers . "
king henry was stout , and he turned him about ,
with flying tails , uncouthly seen ;
and then the god became the artisan .
that lemyred ase gold bryght ;
scarce could he speak these words of woe :
  _ sk['u]ta _ may be acc . of the noun _ sk['u]ti _ , " overhanging
gainst them whom fortune miserably thwarts :
much diminished ; and through failure of food , and the severity of
and in you the ideal shape presenting
when we commit a sin , lose paradise ,
but , bother the boy , here comes our john
once shamed the swarthy crow ;
of atabalipa ; and yet unspoiled
and as a goat - herd from his watch - tow'r crag
i have heard voices calling softly
fain would the girls inquire indeed
and yet , as if i thought aloud ,
" who , " quoth the other , " choseth thee to prove
the mist by it shall suddenly be rent ,
only there is a good laugh the cowl puffs up , and nothing more is
pleases the eye , when , their stalks joined , you place
to join the fortune - finding rout ;
made a sketch of kimi lying
he , skilled in every gentle art
thy pretty hands when thou didst gather them ,
such are some of the compositions , original in style , natural in
but janak ’s child , my lord , stood by ,
“ by those bright eyes which me enslav'd , by all
with whom my soul hath dwelt so long ,
who after moves and governs it at will ,
good is thy lot in its degree ;
argantes rose , the rest their talk forbear .
hasten from me not unwilling .
" what strange bird is that , i wonder ? "
d was a duck
que del oro y del cetro pone olvido .
' twas dreamed by some the deluge would ensue ,
his complexion is peach - like -- he 's fair as a girl .
so on i ramble , now and then narrating ,
there , at them thou thy tail may toss ,
good - bye , piccadilly
wilt thou yet further rouse up evil war and the terrible
to peleus ' son his suppliant speech address'd :
of holmes ( a great physician ! )
earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own ;
the stars themselves , some shaped , others unshaped ,
had kept me ' midst the glades , and strayed away
lord of the world , of mighty fame ,
the waters had to say ?
who view such scenes , on each of you i call
we warr , if warr be best , or to regain
" o king , baptize us with thy holy water " ;
ah , come , and shew the starry hour
not for milk and honey ,
search both the houses through and through
and on a day , with prompt rebound ,
and of this remnant will i leave a part ,
in tina 's azure dome ;
but jest sits on a form an ' hears what schoolmaister do say ,
the sparks of fun would fan ;
but that soul loving earth and the sun
and now himself , who for so many built
ceaseless retire , and war not with the gods .
between the hills and the sea ;
dreadful lie glares , and terribly he foams ,
i fain by thee would tarry ,
' o i hae kill'd my father dear ,
and a cargo of plum pudding to the men of hindoostan ;
there store thou them , where fresh and green
" a goddess with a god , to keep
he crept among the trees ....   i went next day
have you been watching us with your bright eyes
" call thou on , o golden cuckoo ,
when wrathful jove 's irrevocable doom
gleams up the pinnacles far and free :
motherly pity , bend thy face and grant
fly across the seven oceans ,
yet in my heart i then both speak and write
until the bees , from clover rows
and all my molly then appeared .
each melted into other , mingling hues ,
but how this toun com to destruccioun
but rather with what sort of shape equipped ,
the commandant observing john was heated ,
_ dowie _ , sad , worn with grief .
to men and to immortals . then the gods
and afterwards with grave advizement said :
besides , report her longing ear did fill ,
and kiss the--_hand_--of britain 's queen .
which suffered years ago the dreary change !
let us the festal hours beguile
and his discourse pursuing still , the seer
forth flew the splendid reins from nestor 's hand ,
more and more there was a peculiarity in the goods selected by
not distant far , calm _ charity _ shall stand ,
rest , lads , rest!--our work is done--
like thee ! oh unending night , and thy mystical shine :
the mantuan , when he heard him , turn'd to me ,
now therefore , if her pity further me ,
virtue , because , according to palæphatus , many of them lived in a
o the weary haunt for me ,
let friends deride , let scoffers rage ,
in the spring i asked the daisies
thus journeyed he for many a year
relaxes , strains , and draws them to and fro ;
to hem that thenken forto thryve .
forgetting to oar with wings , they furl their sails ,
bright - harnessed angels sit in order serviceable .
o argument blasphemous , false and proud !
and i shall die of fright
i trust him in thy hand !
there is not room for death ,
but everybody wished the day would dawn anew .
was humbled into thinking this might be
by colin 's cottage lies his game ,
the silver goddess of the blue domain ;
the curtain rose .   a fat girl with a pout
omnia omnibus annuit--
than that the bird sings where it builds beneath
they walk unmantled by the cumbrous stole ? "
él era el alivio de todo villarino .
should wield the weapons of the sky .
" alas ! that i came o'er the moor ,
and took to homespun wearing ?
en el nonbre del padre,--que fizo toda cosa ,
cum castum amisit polluto corpore florem ,
a life of loving labour , for each line
i joyed for me , i joyed for her ,
that streaked the birdlings ' wings and breasts
dip down upon the northern shore ,
the windows shut , the gas alight in globes ,
are thrones ; in whom the first trine ends .   and all
since fate relentless stopped their heav'nly voice ,
giving from out her large heart 's bounteous store
and led her to her couch , and all night long
there 's a burma girl a - settin ' , and i know she thinks o ' me ;
" but ' twas a famous victory . "
rides down ambition through whom art endureth .
wi ' favours secret , sweet , and precious :
while abject toil and fear
_ 1st witch . _ thrice the brinded cat hath mewed .
the extreme scab take thee , and thine , for me .
in the shade of the apple - tree again
floribus , albet ubi primum paliurus in agris :
now entertain conjecture of a time
on the ways of dark desire ;
and boldly , where thy inmost bowers are set ,
this molded outline plays about ;
and plant beside the cotton - tree
king carle has now six squadrons on the field .
and all the banks smell of the golden broom ;
why must we spend these lonely nights ?
so all those warriors fated / by hand of death lay strewn ,
stretched his hand to pluck the bulrush ,
“ i will not tribute pay , forsooth ,
turned thither , whence was shot the murderous reed ;
fice greffoun ( antony , son of the griffin or gripe ) .
and jove hath made it of a kind
thus too in counsel sages find
the knights for their fair guide to look begin ,
with mast , and helm , and pennon fair ,
life , may perhaps be found a deep happiness .
and then the light - house slim and lone ;
the god of speech was neighbour to his lips ,
and from the tainted valleys
amethyst - flamed or ruby - girdled , jarred
but now herself disdained , abandoned ,
of this our sacrifice !
in reverent awe he heard its mystic call ,
then come with me from the haunts of men
teach me the truth , lord , though my heart may break
our fame 's high note , tho ' swelling it expands !
but he shall be wronged by none
and lift from the water a ghastly hand
which fill your rivers , rhone and po , he drank .
and i am very happy , for i know that i 've been good .
a lion now , and now a bear ,
trifles also , and jests,--could pour out freely together
in the never - ending summer .
when upon his feet he tied them ,
since i lay with my face to the wall ,
and they all lived together in a little crooked house .
what art can wash her tears away ?
he scholde of trouthe thilke grace
five rotten gables look upon
she flies to the jungle , with false tales beguiling ,
though fail'd his strength o'erwearied , yet god 's almighty hand
as though devoid of life ; these hands seem clenched ,
treading upon the darkness without feet ,
let the feathered starlight ray
for long he bathes his breast and head ,
the blue seine rolls her wave ,
but wing their way , simurgh - like , to the sky .
from harí lordly lions trace ,
fenc'd up the verdant wall ; each beauteous flour ,
were free from that elected race ; as light
descried her slim veiled outline , saw her twist
mean morsel flung him from the plenteous feast--
except the string of mirth;--the hearer shares
bend thine ear to listen for the lute of love is sighing :
for that cause , it is said ,
to a degree .
never such an ambuscade
am angry , that beside the beaked ships ,
famosa pellex thraciæ .
transmitter of his royal race .
when slyly touched by his white hand
come and heal my dying people ,
for her pure spirit is with mine
and wooden shoes beating the round , grey stones
the wounded in the wars , when peace results ,
odysseus himself lay tossing this way and that . and as when
jove o’er his eyes celestial glories spread ,
leaves , upon time 's branch , were growing brightly ,
appalled , an owlet 's ' larum chilled with dread ,
scorched ; nor when the wretched icarus felt his flanks
as the crowned king looked up , for lo !
on merlin 's mount , or snowdon 's rugged sides ,
as they were wooden rakes . and in a mirror
the hour was late . king arthur , rising , said
that 's what they used to sing along the roads last spring ;
but with thy fleshless palms
the crowd and missed him , but he hit leucus , the brave comrade of
c cut it .
it surely be ,
stir up the sugar , man!--and tell your girl
to the tent - royal of their emperor ;
for standing on the persians ' grave ,
and the black cock that does not crow .
as soon as the effulgence smote my face ,
must redeem our loss ;
i can not tell you , " answered he .
beneath an olive tree they halt , and soon
i sang his dirge , i could sing that time
bid echo wake in the rocky halls ,
= lachrymal= nerves of the muses )
checking the fuller watch for what he feared ,
there came the beat of merry feet ,
of beauteous helen ? and of all mankind
heard the pheasant , bena , drumming ,
engender'd monstrous shapes of every crime .
into the quiet fold , until thou sleep ,
as to my neck into the stream , while she ,
l. 416 . _ sweet basil _ , a fragrant aromatic plant .
as winds upon a winter day .
" why com'st thou , child of aegis - bearing jove ?
cold as the crags upon his native coast ,
each horseman drew his battle - blade ,
yore._--hezekiah.--see isaiah xxxviii .
save his own soul 's light overhead ,
love is so new !
out of their toilsome days into this day
by their nephews and their nieces .
that creeping pestilence is driven away ,
who knows what paths his bruised feet trod ,
when he saw the fugitives passing in sorrowful masses ) .
thirsty for gold , nor feverish for fame .
enslav'd unto a little dirt , or sand ?
aye ! many a rhyme my pen has flown ,
must never bat an eye ,
while waterloo with cannæ 's carnage vies ,
blushes and starts of consciousness and shame ;
he woke up with a sick taste in his mouth
so now they speed their journey forth amid a happy cry ;
going up to the attic .
and weariful attempts to guess
retained when half was given -- one the man
he flow'd and ebb'd uncertain , to return
high and low in choir shall meet ,
" oh , here have i ever lain forlorn :
with triumph tell them , some of lusian race
there lie the chambers of guilty delight ,
it shone but faintly , like a single candle ,
the city is deadfalled with danger and doom --
that woods and streams admired their excellence ;
turning a stubborn clay to fruit ,
if there 's one thought above another
" confound him , " says smith ( who from ca nt 's not exempt ) ,
turn , charge , and answer every call of war ;
leave to go and see my wife , whom i call the belle aurore ! "
from nature 's bliss we draw relief ,
mosaick ; underfoot the violet ,
she stooped ; and out of languor leapt a cry ;
the old cock'd hat , the brown surtout -- the same ;
will silent be ; and not a soul , to tell
and crisp as cracklin ' ; and steak that you could n't have the face
how all the salamanca bells did ring ;
jehovah has triumphed,--his people are free !
their pleasant springs are dry ;
her sovran spake : " how shall we those requite ,
stanza xc .         " not all the blood at talavera shed,"--
whenever midget tried her voice ;
once so faithful and so true ;
and courage is lull'd in the warrior 's breast .
and he glared at the roof like a monarch bereft
that wisdom 's self should not be tutored yet ,
there is gradasso , there is sacripant ,
" whose flooding beam hath drown'd dear cupid 's eye .
i think a ton of solid stone would hurt my feelings more .
i knelt before the gods , and then held up
apperception , this particular awareness was his " message . "
give a cheer !
they might not thence , but with much blood be brought .
the books , the books are opened ! awestruck his eyes behold
sonst sie , die armen schaefer , sich bewahrt
that i did not heed my mother ,
the foul invading foe !
to heart 's desire ,
mine let me live , in mine unworthiness ,
then a pair of loving trout ,
wrote sorrows on my face .
they indicted me , the newspapers disgraced me ,
might be forged and duly hammered .
rugged , storm - swept , it embowers
' twas his command and succor , but e'en then
a gode womman is mannys blys ,
xenophon the wine - bibber dedicates an empty jar to thee , bacchus ;
metals of drossiest ore to perfect gold ,
though the sheep ran loose the while ,
at the homestead of the fair one ?
and flash . in garb of shepherd , rapacious wolves are seen from
and of her absent bairns , puir highland hearts !
held to thy lips , and many a time in fits
sweetly where caverned dirce flows
we are betray'd by what is false within .
through the tumult of their warlike preparation
we played in this garden , long ago ,
their floor is bare of carpet ,
the caverns blacken as their brows
there goes a hole in your side -- how you hug it !
nor yet our talk by journeying .   still we spake ,
of ithaca , dispatching to the town
a gentle bee , with his loud trumpet murmuring ,
and was a myhti kyng also :
bade the bloodless lips not falter ;
there is a great number of spiders any one of which might be
serveth of nought , so weylaway the whyle ! '
well squar'd to fortune 's blows .   therefore my will
like water , as i would my life , to save
then shall his sacred dust be piously laid in the churchyard . "
because his legs have grown too short ;
like a tough bit of gristle ,
a meaning ere articulate in word ;
and , oh ! he had that merry glance
and all the clammy crawling things that spat
finished thy work , and kept thy faith
william some years survived , but years no trace
o melancholy bird , a winter 's day
and a little house in simla in the prehistoric days .
when they git their head set .   so we sent marthy
bot whan sche takth hir conseil with satorne ,
now , year by year , the warrior 's iron mark
or lads that tak a keek a - glee
have patience ; i will come to thee at last .
from ale and grains ,
" whoso hath the gift of giving wisely , equitably , well ;
water - fetching goes the noble
false though she be to me and love ,
maidens clung in circle , on little fists their chins ;
philippo strozzi strangled in his prison .
forsitan illius nemoris latuisset in umbra ,
than silver lights upon a crystal stream .
and bluer violets and snowdrops lay
have been in his _ coat _ on so _ sleeveless _ an errant .
his faithful dog his fate doth share ;
the shallop flitteth silken - sailed ,
a mocking shade , a phantasy,--
recoiled the champion from unequal fray ;
with direr aspect ne'er dost thou appear ,
that i 'm happier than a king .
and of the affairs wherein ' thas been the wo nt
account of that division tripartite
the moral of this verse
that picks up crumbs around the door . "
when youthful hope is highest , and every heart
loud groan'd the beechen axle , under weight
the wretched parent , with a pious haste ,
are the men that command ,
in the symphony that rules the day and night .
then if a wider course shall rather please ,
where love and friendship yield their choicest blessing ,
shown in the tidemarks on crags prehistoric ?
how tutti , taiti--
since the rabble all tried for a _ voice _ in the state.--
and all improvements up to date .
some one might be waiting for
at whatever source we drink it ,
all black and blossomless this winter night ,
_ when he tries the hearts of men . _
but only what you see . . . .   look yet again--
and lang , lang , may the maidens sit ,
no soft voice of kindred ,
_ mephistopheles _ . you 've come to the very place for it , then .
bounds to the wood at my approach . the bee ,
and with equal pride has he sent them back .
the wild goose , homing , seeks a sheltering ,
one stands before the window , drinks his glass ,
that not one thought unkind be murmured o'er thy grave .
and gave to me a name .
at which so many world - formed sages sneer ,
breaks in fresh blushes from the east ,
betwixt the bay leaves round them worn ,
on the rolling perarie ,
i knew him by my fluttering heart !
far moors that echo to the ringing horn,--
the adversary , marvelling
nor could i , the wretched perish .
there lies the brew !
a _ painter _ may raphael 's judgment want ,
in the dying christian 's groans ;
metals , seems to have preceded the discovery of letters ; and
we falter the world with our eyelids , at our laughter men
purer than the drops of dew , and brighter than the morn .
he struck the strings so sweetly ever as he play'd ,
might tales of stirring int'rest tell
three poets of one age and nation ,
no longer lives he ?   strikes not on his eye
well i saw the poising head ,
she whom he loved was in her shroud , nor pain
then feed us and break us and handle and groom ,
thou shalt forgiven be . "
these years of forest exile past , —
thro ' the brown air precipitates his flight .
of lands and cities he had seen ,
but a fleeter steed had runjeet dehu !
drew his arms back , like a cricket .
" ilmarinen thus made answer :
my heart fails in my breast .
amid the pressure of such cruel pain ,
a savior at his elbow through the war ,
and smite to earth oppression 's rod ,
they put the net across my cot ,
the burden of a grasshopper ;
" taheia , here is the end , i die a death for a man .
might graces from thy favor take ,
though slant from sword and casque the weapon shore ,
the deacons used to pass the plate , and once again i see
i hadde ynogh , if i hire kiste .
i think there must have been , a blinding light ,
she died in beauty,--like a lay
" pray do me the honour to step just into
in hast was climbing up the easterne hill ,
" name thee , or not a hair shall tarry here . "
it was the proud dame thorelile ,
the faithful follower of idomeneus :
tangled in the haze
if you poach here , there 'll be a fight .
passin ' right by !
playing cards , while all were thinking ,
and public misfortunes , in all their variety ,
of frailty which can weight the arm
pluck up your hearts and leave this moan ,
across the rotting pads in the lily lake
the cowslip loves the lea ,
but every tack we made we brought the north head close aboard ;
far easier than walking .
and more and less the monuments are heated . "
as we used to walk at night ,
dark , dark lay the drifters , against the red west ,
and the breeches , and all that ,
full thirty mile from plimmers style ,
beside whose brim their battle they should end .
without controul the warrior swept the field ;
to see the crystal show'r ,
" non , tu n'es pas mon frère ! "
to the fierce kabibonokka .
and far the end may be ;
an ' she wo n't take ' er feed 'cause o ' waitin ' for ' is step ,
a life perhaps unto his death ;
to give my life to pacify a god ,
i mean _ achievements _ , won by toilsome stages
come , tell us , if thou wilt , the truth . ”
my dreams present you thrumming on your string
his seed , when is not set , shall bruise my head :
hardly till leo made an ending staid ;
hou ferst sche mihte unto hire winne
come whistling near to his brain - pan or heart ;
at brunhild 's court ' twould surely become the wearers well .
and rolled the head i ' the kennel door ,
the humblest service rendered here
nor envy 's blast , nor fortune 's rage
in all its foulness and deformity .
and is lorenzo 's salamander heart
though listless heart command .
ballad , " the roses in my
in the glorious hours golden ,
great is beauty 's grace ,
and a thousand desperadoes just his style ,
a man with a slouch hat , smoking .
and finer shall the banner seem
death , with flame in hand , an open bloodred flower ,
to let it deck itself with thee ,
see , yonder lies , all breathless , cold , and pale ,
was proud with trappings , and his brawny chest
let the mermaid pass the sentence :
seemed piping janet 's sang .
" it 's not been done , the sea , not yet been done ,
what thing it was for me made earth a hell
that i am , had the bravest in all troy for my sons , and there is
above the nations,--underneath the graves,--
yet william 's time ne'er seemed to hang on hand ;
with purple and with amethyst ;
stammering and staring .   it was their last hour ,
the savoury sweets i bid , and sprinkle them ,
" let , i pray , the suatians and the horses
in april , the second or edinburgh , edition was published : it was
a fav'rite spaniel of my friend ,
let farwell glory in the fray
be for love or disdaining ;
beloved of earth , her heart should feel at length
will you put me quite out of your mind and thoughts ? can you ? if
her loved one was laid there .
o still flow between us , thou wide , roaring main ;
there , where the voice of love is heard no more ,
for such sad spirit reserve,--
nineteen , twenty , my plate 's empty ;
nor yet idomeneus his warlike rage
should love good victuals and good drinks .
will help you , and you must prevail .
" that , in pure gentleness , with little care
annie made her bed a little forbye ,
pressing down upon sail and mast ,
til that cupide and venus eke
when we dine now -- we but dine!--
as thy faithful life - companion ,
shape of a detached marchen or fairy - tale among races who
no mortal has attained it ,
through this blind haze , which ever since i saw
midnight auroras ? or the fires of war ?
i telle yow in certen ;
when kullervo spake as follows :
bold deed thou hast presum'd , adventrous eve ,
spake he thus in supplication :
menecles for my advocate .
he asked me if " i did not wish that i might get it back ? "
my luve 's in germanie ,
sat one who had a bow , and he there was crowned ;
with semblance fair , the unhappy men she placed .
scroggie , scroggy , scrubby .
i , as thou seest , am battered by this rain .
and this i did ,
by too great splendor is his name attended ;
to apples of gold like these ?
that that folk mad wit thair handes . ” --(met . hom . p. 61 . )
nor the sublime
give them to your sons ,
be offer'd to us , and the spirit knows
now hath the ice indeed chased us to land ,
gray sorcery ; magic cloaks and rings and rods ;
unable e'er to flee the bog ,
like a grey shadow lurking in the light ,
above the highest sphere we meet
their course shall so evince their brutishness ,
by the quick current flies that nimble yawl ;
like the aimless , helpless , hopeless , did i drivel
  the concluding stanza was found among the author 's papers , and
fly the myriads of madan 's arrows !
thus did he come , deducing to this point ,
whare the old divin'-log lays sunk and fergot .
the torrent of the chilly air
i can with ease supply thee from within
over fair shoulders scattered--
white flowers their mourners are , nature their passing bell .
quieter than a dead man on a bed .
tuosque colleis inter , & tuas procul
mother and daughter , sister , sweetheart , wife ,
when they arrive before the precipice ,
who make poor " will do " wait upon " i should"--
and drunk with lust , with anger hot ,
as the dying man murmurs , the thunders swell--
still as his mother favour'd you ,
_ " wherever the sails of peace are seen
musick -- goatskin of water .
and upon the pathways shouting .
and succeeding ages , since it is confidently believed that ,
blessings to bless you here below . "
with the man who has done his best .
' what stranger this whom thus nausicaa leads !
for to that throne , whereof thy sire was lord ,
they come , sad as tears to the eyes that are bright ;
the morning lit , the birds arose ;
come yield thy selfe quicklye , or slaine thou must bee : "
sore weeping stood they round .   she raised no wail ,
but stilt , but still , i like them dearly--
something to keep you always in my mind .
but yet the people turned not back ,
deceav'd ; they fondly thinking to allay
a note so honey - sweet i heard ,
grudge and withhold ,
but flasking up the liquor dearest won ,
“ the trojan power , than ajax ' stupid soul
then he left the ship when it came to land ,
_ soldiers three _ ( 1888 ) was the first of six collections of short
as lately fenwick , sair forfairn ,
distressing themselves , and came back again afterwards . you will
for nowt aat o ’ keighla to haworth sud ride ,
and the wail of the plover awakes on the mountain ,
  this line ran thus in the first edition :
as if because her tale was at an end
a wondrous dame in habit , gesture , face ;
and sketch'd the history of the foe of man .
to take a wedded wife , a fitting bride ,
stranger , go ! heav'n be thy guide !
alone with thee in breathless adoration ,
since that authentic , radiant register ,
o miserable me ! how i did shudder
cast you down ?
and hot secrets of dreams that day can not say ? ) .
to the grapes the wine - pitcher
as they quaff .
the clear cold crystal of a mossy pool
the sermon he heard when to church he last went ;
and watch of hostile spies in the bright noon .
this stone for name 's sake melts to tears .
then waking from our languid trance ,
and moths , were of no small account in his eyes ;
" indeed , if i stayed
into a lower world , to this obscure
to cease upon the midnight with no pain ,
how complete the ship 's forecastle ?
i shall not miss them much,--
in which no man must act a part
o tidings , etc .
declare what path will lead us to the mount . "
her sacrifice was given , her heart 's proud hero saved .
as if a hand had appeared and written upon them , " upharsin . "
" this man shall not die ! "
and drags at each remove a lengthening chain . "
and gathering my tall frame ,
of _ mine _ is a serious matter !
each ( for madness ruled the hour )
hans von weerth was our good colonel .
and i 'll begin to treat by what decree
when charles was well enough to rise ,
love of true happiness replete with joy ,
and knowledge and authority -- rough banks
that he will find it everywhere ;
the hot summer had made his hue all brown ;
" with none to envy and none gainsay ,
and practised , calloused hand ,
he hadde a sone in al his welthe ,
and they stood in a deep window , looking to the west .
the cradle of the strong one ;
with heavenly coats of sword - proof mail ,
quae te ut paeniteat postmodo facti faciet tui .
turn'd round his head , where his feet stood before ,
in three portmanteaus !
" thy paradise itself were dim
on a bright stone .
roam the city , to search and see
and tackled anything that came .
" an upstart multitude and sudden gains ,
and then will i , for true you are and sweet
o ' clod or stane ,
from that long drip of human tears
she needes must yield her castle strong ,
have you no pity for us?--you , who stand
once deem'd effeminate , but dragging now
but a voice from within must their oracle be ;
in yonder pond : the new - born babe lay drowned
nature , tok hem into lore
the northern fires beyond the zenith spread
if ever prayer hath ravished me so high
here 's a cap of larkspur blue ,
little place . "
the poet now his guide hath found ,
guido reni , like his own eye 's apple
for failing to slow when commanded to stop .
that drips , unheard , though silent hours ,
“ nor polish'd marble shone ; but rear'd with trees
a guisa di leon quando si posa .
and hawkins cried--"i stand by francis drake " ;
let the wind convey thee thither ,
whilst , ling'ring , to this stone thou drawest near .
in shadows cool and dim
from john danyel 's _ songs for the lute , viol , and voice _ , 1606 .
lo ! sails that gleam a moment and are gone ;
from sable on to golden ,
finding them often beyond his ken ;
by day made strange , the woods we range
i found it the source of an exquisite pleasure ,
dragg'd from the press ; but to the rescue came
refresh'd , they wait them to the bower of state ,
two flower - enfolding crystal vases she
the leader asked him then who he was ; whereon he answered , " i
and yit my _ rickollection _ makes
the other bare the seal , and causes scanned ,
he weeps his unavailing tear ,
love so grounded ends in scorning ,
rumours about the death of the suitors will get about in the
smooth english verse of ten syllables , there is naturally a pause
and reached at last , untouched by fear ,
i 'd love to see
mother dear , withhold thy censure ,
black as the clouds that shade st . kilda 's shore ,
an ' a sprig o ' rosemary .
where , cosmopolitanly planned ,
may they flourish , confed'rate forever ,
of most plebeian ancestry , may none the less prove
tune--"_when she came ben she bobbit . _ "
so -- on , with quickened breaths , i follow still--
darts through the tyrannous heart of denial .
guarded within the old red wall 's embrace ,
was in its place ,
if she greets it juist keeps the hoose cheerier ,
and ghosts of vanished joy and pain .
and satiate of thy breast ,
looks in and sheds a blessing on the scene .
and so forever from that hall
for thou art rightly punished , and guard well the ill - gotten
and then more vivid was my power of sight
and if heav'n will that we the strong - built walls
thrice through the arras , which had never stirred--
priscilla , warmer than her name ,
for dead , dead , dead , you are to me !
who chases not the nanny , that eats the grapes ,
if iewels rich , thou diddest hold in prise ,
she was sporting with her women ,
a mistress moderately fair ,
he had berries ' twixt his horns , crimson - red as
hesitation and regret,--far less that they have been slighted .
to see the worm again .
cuánta fué su grandeza y es su estrago .
on the pavement here , and there beyond it is looking
on the plates was placed the salmon ,
like foam on the ocean went floating by--
the little tribute that the muse can pay ;
“ but hermes brooks delay not : with his rod ,
celebrated hindu ascetic râmânanda .   râmânanda had brought to
now upon his hump ,
the nation 's good , his master 's glory ,
longing their lord to gratify ,
verse crown'd with ivy and with holly ;
and rich men grown to be poor again ,
and moves her pity with his tears .
merry air
little danneved and young swayne trost ,
kah - wéen , nee - zhéka kè - diaus - ai ,
can it be a ball of sunlight ?
deliberately and undeceived
would to god that ye were
" there loki fareth , and seeth in a land of nothing good ,
inuoluitque suo flammantis igne cometas ,
another day beheld the giant slain .
example .
scandal and schism , and therefore thus are rent .
in withering unrevived .
thy lone voice spoke to me like memory .
and all the air doth mourning wear .
messiah all - divine !
teloque deprendes aprum ;
or than any army beneath the sky .
and at the secret marble stair
which the saviour infant kiss'd ;
rarely , save to hear the rector ,
i said , ' it 's certain there is no fine thing
then with the sainted hermit all
and through lemminkainen 's liver .
seeking him morn and evening , but in vain ,
and holy faith her sacred rites display'd .
and feigned the fashion of the warrior 's tread .
the pureness of thy soul .
and gan him to recomfort as i might .
the dace pushed ' gainst the stream , the dragon - fly ,
“ the parent . lo ! my faltering hands refuse
which we may wear with honor the stately queen before . "
" a kitten ... it clawed at the reeds , and they pushed it down
to those whose hire is with the price of blood ;
there was one dares ' mid the trojan host ,
himself a favourite , ventured to address
and bharat and śatrughna too .
lone sufferer ! will not she believe
you used to come at ten o'clock ,
" i prospected the pelly bed , i prospected the white ;
and posies everywhere ! )
a shade prophetic , of the tomb ;
that morning we had breakfast in our room ,
to the valleys underneath,--
which charm'd the charming mary montagu .
had rested from the strewing of the flowers ;
fair lined slippers for the cold ,
that a fresh love - leaf crumpled soon will dry ,
in which had culture ripest grown,--
a soldan whilom was of perce ,
leaves not a scar by which the wound is traced ;
where those perennial cisterns were prepared
" i shall not baptize a wizard ,
we hail'd it in god 's name .
the fairy enchantment of grandmother days
ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin ,
answered in the words which follow :
the crammer 's boast , the squadron 's pride ,
my heart , a victim to thine eyes ,
all thy terrible part is now played !
that done , i shall not see again
oh , ye souls who have made life
other accuses him of other deed :
who crieth with a cry long heard of me ?
etrurian tombs , the graves of yesterday ;
and from his blazoned baldric{10 } slung
  this sort of burlesque abstract , which may be so easily but so
forth came the noble envoys ; there was a mighty throng ;
if he 's a parent , lass or boy ,
their former feuds and fears and jealousies ;
every rising morn before me !
watch the effect of sunlight on the boughs
upon my quilt of gentle blue .
canto xxv . eighth circle : seventh pit : fraudulent thieves .
navel , whereon he fell groaning on to his knees and a cloud of
of her own expanded person ,
we , while he spake , ceas'd not our onward road ,
_ o the sea is hungry ever _ !
i at those accents saw the splendours down
fields of grass dew - glistening ;
" perhaps , " said elfinhart , " you do not dare ! "
but not to drop corn for my father,--
in vain he strives to bind the broken chords ,
holding a child more dear than property ,
of men that live , or have lived , or shall live
extended pale , by swarthy memnon slain !
ulysses was glad at finding himself , as minerva told him , in his
then anointed he the minstrel ,
then don your brilliant scarlet coats ,
terrific noise,--save niobé , to all :
the sun 's gate also and the land of dreams
and all the men loved him ,
so told as earthly notion can receave .
the waves so gently flow ;
" i ca n't _ give _ one to you--
for the same cause that beatrice has not smiled .
fish - dinners will make a man spring like a flea ,
that one among so many overleaped
“ his deadly weapon ' twixt his shoulders plung'd ;
but that their cruelty doth still increace ,
resistless desolation !
in the first sweet sleep of night ,
emicat extemplo cunctis trepidantibus audax
its freshness and coolness thou equally shared'st ;
when the old moon is vanished from the sky
which was enchanted to no end beside ,
from house and field the youth pours forth to wonder and to gaze ;
“ to - morrow ’s my wife ’s day to bake ;
( for them , for them have i lived , in them my work is done , )
for my patience , though late , i shall still gain a prize .
there was an old man with a beard ,
which he beside the rivulet
give me , sirree , my crab and ale ,
a shade appeared to us , and came behind us ,
a bedmate of the snail and eft and snake ,
or the nails that lie upon joseph 's floor ;
books on natural history , reading , 103 - 105 .
i cried , " my ain ! my doo ' !
life 's involv'd and varied pageants ,
and the night chants the psalm o'er the mortal clay ,
that had so little seeming gladness in it ,
that is so young and fair .
then pour your boundless sorrows o’er the dead . "
no!--thou should'st light the nations on their way ,
but if we had it all to do
that fault dissevers
that thou , light - winged dryad of the trees ,
and with fresh flourets hill and valley smil'd .
for lack of freedom of the press ,
clasps and unclasps his gradual hands
in blaze of gorgeous light .
languished the faithful dog , and wonted care
he crushed remorse and wrestled down despair :
might well be dangerous food .
in war and peace allied ,
swiftly hopping on its journey
and kissed him with a sister 's kiss ,
and trojan youth the same oblations bring .
thoughtful of drink , and eager , in a dream ,
to sing the song which deepest burns
the castle portal stood grimly wide ;
nomen parentes nominarunt claudiam .
imprisoned in a waste and desert land ,
in feith , your ordre is ruled in good wyse !
on the borders of the lakelet ? "
for ease , the toiling dutchman sighs ,
of wisdom ; hope no higher , though all the stars
why wilt thou fly after spring to the south ,
then joi , the father , he answered low
the gallantry , the graciousness , that she has brought to me ;
o black and everlasting night ,
them fast to their ambrosial mangers , and leaned the chariot
of all these ways , if each pursues his own ,
unto the doughty siegfried / and eke my sister fair :
the pass of war ? not so had tydeus crouch'd ;
indignation and shame through their regiments speed :
of blazing furnaces by night ,
but he lacks the one merit of kindling enthusiasm ;
between your prayers and god like phantom seas
he looked beyond the great inrushing sea ,
there 's gaw'n , misca'd waur than a beast ,
it wrench'd his teeth , and fill'd his eyes with blood ;
or dying surely from the world ;
of countless stars , went sailing through the skies ,
out over scrog and scaur ,
or think her trumpet voices fail .   to - day
his strong - neck'd horses worn with labour vain
i useter say , when i growed up i 'd be a circus chap
for the joy of life and the terror of death
vivere bis vita posse priore frui .
no more the chisel moves within his hands ,
earth 's power to baffle ocean 's power resume ;
to give my love good - morrow !
my soul in agony cried out to god ,
the fairest roots and fruit that grow ,
the trophies of a conqueror ;
or downs of gold beflecked with shadows ' flight ,
“ and parent 's sepulchre ; then , having gain'd
that lord of giants fierce and fell
then , beaming o'er the illumined wall they shone ;
unto æneas ' fellowship , keen with the shaft and spear .
and , through that perishing cloud - wrack , face looked up
as queen was called , and this for thee forewent ;
ere vengeance be quenched or our wrongs be forgiven .
delves in the miser 's golden mass .
started from his side ,
at anchor in yon beauteous bay ,
and lo attempted , with his bow and arrow ,
yet she 'll value the wearer for exquisite taste .
with its exquisite outline and features of grace ,
" what gave you , " she cried , with a terrified start ,
lifeful truth thy being warms ,
from the lips of nawadaha ,
or his high harp blind homer never strung ?
thou art our only refuge ; we ,
there 's none that ever knew
here sanctities and high saints stand ,
then close the valves of her attention
the se swellyth by planettes well i fynde
culver is there , with the cliff and the light .
what mortall man hath ben promotyd so :
and poured his arrows like a flood ,
last night , to my reverie sold ,
their heart in shipwreck : from the waves they pluck
i saw the twinkle of white feet ,
but seas between us braid hae roar'd ,
prevailing shin'd .   yet we a little space
who , when others fools are still ,
rolling forth like seething water ,
party and the other shall hunger for thee ; but far from the goat
big cheese is synonymous name ,
“ anxious we wish to go : pyreneus fast
with many a hermit ’ neath the trees
would crown his fame , as he had told upon :
and who for my salvation didst endure
around the many , whose exalted station
and on his horrid brow defiance low'rs .
entellus wastes his forces on the wind ,
of rustics fearful , she her orchard round
some word , sir john had uttered when her wrath
serene in primal strength , compelling
disclosed new millions of the human race .
on equal ground with him , but held my head
and some one in the confusion
whether it were a _ belle _ or _ beau _ ,
alas ! it 's no thy neibor sweet ,
withers ' neath the tyrant 's vice ?
he seemed to slight her mute request :
the precious agates , the pee - wees , the chinies--
' twas otherwise , when in fair thessaly
whose cruel deeds the king distress ,
thus , by the rankling dart oppressed ,
the king sat under a moon of gold
given to squalor , rags and disorder .
bring sad thoughts to the mind .
" all the windy ways of men
a bridge of grass - stem bore :
that shinest like a shining gem !
opinion , " i have quite disfigured my copy of the book with my
and let us all have at him with one accord , and drive him ,
and wider streets in purer air than ours ?
but i'le be true to thee ( said he :) one houre
i have no precious time at all to spend ,
shall in the blossom 's heart descry
when this was done .   it seemed her constant care
to the sandy lonesome shore ;
wide open so you can get through ;
freely he spoke of war ,
more white and red than doves or roses are ;
to write as your sweet mother does
covetous , envious , proud .   look to it well :
her dress , and went upstairs with her maids .   she then put some
i was not of those whom the buffets of fate
when to repress , and when indulge our flights :
louis vii . , being chosen bishop of paris , resigned that dignity
your feasts ; consume your own ; alternate feed
you can not press it back with both your hands ,
she 's love , she loves , and yet she is not lov'd .
i am in love with the miller - boy ;
glides from the cell along the galleried caves ,
o light that overflows ,
and it 's here 's to the lasses we leave in the glen ,
or take their pastime in the spacious field .
we stood in the panelled pew ,
and haply too , before the unconquered lord ,
five deep he toasts the towering lasses ;
or gather hazel nuts among the thickets
and over their hearts a proud despot so reignest .
then stick to earth , and leave the lofty sky :
his knighthood and his privilege retain'd ;
the longest , the last of terrestrial things .
spiritus austri imbricitor . naves velivolae , etc . etc .
for food to wolves , though she a pagan were ,
" i would die like a small withered leaf in the autumn ,
let them honor and save the land of the brave ,
stabb'd , and drew back the weapon ; down he fell ,
sir ralph the rover sailed away ;
a hundredfold , who , having learnt thy way ,
leap , dear standish , leap and wade ;
come , for i love thee , my beloved ! yet .
' twas but for an hour ; and i cherish with pride
the low dash of the wave with startled ear ,
it looks so far removed behind the glass .
' neath a giant tent
i 'll steal away--
and a goose wife hobbled by
philip , when he learn'd to swim !
and then you 'll hear what 's true ;
ornament or connexion . for , even as truth is its own light and
what dost thou counsell me , my sonne ,
had not yet lost their starry diadems
and so forth broght unto the depe
as soon as if he had but dipt for prey :
about my heart , which none can loose but he ,
reach'd ithaca , which from the pylian shore
all meet whom day and care divide ,
gentle love , woe worth the day ,
kind words are blossoms ,
" there are women enough , god knows , " he said . . . .
_ que muero porque no muero _ .
the heaven of heavens , to kiss the distant earth !
my soul ; bare all before her bare indeed !
first the charm'd mind mechanic powers collects ,
but love , by faithless laia taught
have chas'd an antler'd stag , or mountain goat ,
hoping no very old vizier might choose ,
that he , for this and for his first desert ,
her foot slipt away from the ground ;
and feigned to push the old piano where he had shown .
and at thy coming , light with all his beams
would peer from every tree ,
bases attempted , and rescued , and won ,
one lingering trace of wrath or pain .
he had , to be sure -- in a spurt of energy that subsided almost as
your spears first , and see if you can not cover yourselves with
and through the lattice high in yon dead wall ,
« mañana le abriremos , » respondía !
and they are old as old can be ,
or , if in heaven she be not found ,
lillyes , and lyons quarterly adorne ;
as often as his yea and nay ,
until the christmas radiance shone !
an ' he ai n't by ' isself in dat , in dat--
with middle feet it bound him round the paunch ,
struck down , and powerless to free
under which all the wise have fallen helpless .
bound for the praise of all - too - precious you ,
shall roar so loud , that fortune shall be fain
and clasp each brother 's hand ,
which tries , and counter - stands the shock
though i shall walk with him no more ,
patient , and white , and woeful . ' tis so still ,
these who once spake me , speak no more ,
on wall - flower , too , with richest odor filled ,
' and if he does a murder
yet fairer when with wisdom as your shield
sitting bent by the fallen fire ,
and springs , exulting , to his fields again .
i wish that i were dead , but i 'm no like to dee ;
i will be short , and having quickly hurl'd
one heedless taunt you e’er have felt ,
or pity give my heart to hear
of laas , from amycla , otilus ,
a jaded horse , his head down bent ,
humorsome but kindly , very !
my sister 's best feller is ' most six - foot - three ,
eyes on the door ;
earth is as heaven 's mirror to - night ;
each other long beheld , and leaning stood
and as i looked it seemed in kind
to press some care , some haunting sadness down ;
to her home in sariola ,
from me , all my friends are gone ,
the while was heard unceasing the sound of mirth and play ,
and thy night - time 's solemn need ,
that of so good a comfort and a chere
from greek and roman writers on agriculture
i know that new recruits shall come
are those of francisco de la torre ( d. 1594 ? ) , luis
high heaven open stands , and there a crowd
just as all things ought to do ;
" time has come when man no longer
one of my dearest , whom i trust :
we walked god 's holy valleys side by side ,
arms from the gods themselves concealed ,
" oh , oh ! " said the farmer , and glanced a sly wink ;
o thing admir'd ! there did appear
( ll . 297 - 314 ) o may we all proclaim it , ere it be too late , and
where soon will sprout the thorns and bines .
tiger , tiger , burning bright
from gorey pools and tower'd dome ,
this warning added :   " see thy words be clear ! "
vaster themes to him who sings .
that breaks away and runs ; a cruelty ,
whose roots enrichment have from ripeness dropped .
they praised -- and he was very proud .
o me ! o life ! of the questions of these recurring ,
continue opening the roots of bussorah roses , as well as the rose
yet undetermined , or to live or die ?
etched where the lands and cloudlands touch and die
leaning on his oars of copper ;
the adversarie .   nor think thou with wind
to either hand his wings he opens wide ;
observe , whatever is said of the original new moon , her tender
" in ether a star quite unknown !
low , low let your music be !
or does some mighty beast of prey
not yet the account that love demands and gives
dropp’d manna . "
there 's danger in longer delay !
alcinous calls a council , in which it is resolved to transport
burning in love 's areanum ; ' twas a cry
as dreadful as the manichean god ,
and sent to you this lettre here by me ;
and stealthily followed the footpath damp .
swear shakespeare is divine ;
deep to the hilt in gore ; behold , he kneels
to succor and save , thou hast sought us here .
was but young ) in this selfsame pavilion of chance .
give me , alas !   in his voracious womb .
las venturas de tu amor ,
through all old time , still laden with a grief ?
i climbs in my old brown gaiters
lulled by the faint breezes sighing through her hair ;
wisely does the sun make answer :
and then ... a vision and a voice,--
now thought it best to disappear ;
often through my curtains peep ,
the fiercer passions of the human breast
and to their owners send them nobly back . "
she nussed jim through a fever once ,
that i am leah : for my brow to weave
and plumb .
has led his countless legions o’er ,
thus taught he her , and for conclusion , saith ,
ayein paris to sen his preie .
o but thy notes were pure ,
the livelong summer day ? "
_ prometheus . _                    and such would seem
delay , and mainly the wooers in the naughtiness of their
t'other day , much in want of a subject for song ;
and the curls of his forehead astir with the wind .
he 'd naught but a hound to his name ;
her coliseum stands ; the moonbeams shine
ye needna be courtin ' at me , auld man , vol . iv . , 222 .
but what befell ' twixt man and maid ,
their snow - white blossoms on my head ,
to seke occasyon of vyle synne and offence
shall roll thunderless and far ,
are turning wise : while some opine
_ reggia mi tolse , e i regni i miei lucenti _ ? '
and just to the south is a park so fair
a horror from the vaulted roof
of thine own troubles . and herein tell me true , that i may
" the day was comd thou was to die ;
calmely or roughly !   ah , she shines too much ;
laughed aloud at poor iagoo ;
vvhich memory hath registred ,
and let me see your face . _ "   so up i sat ,
" ah , cruel lord , " with gentle voice and mien
to reflect back her blushes ,
released from captive thrall ;
whether a husband or a lover ,
as helen 's beauty and not tarnish it
" for as with mine own brother on a day
but on these days of brightness ,
and the noble pillars of god his house
so when the bold montana boy came from his lair to woo ,
sang in the tripod , led me to a bath ,
kicked off both my shoes -- let go arctics and all--
let yive him his corone newe
last may a braw wooer cam down the lang glen ,
and never shall fail
and with icicles shining with rainbow hues ,
we are breathing and alive .
so droll a derelict as that
when the folk by fair words      he had fired with zeal ,
thwarting each divine endeavour ,
and the nasal pipes squeal with their pigs ' voices ,
tree by tree the forest
i 've borne the unfeeling keen reproach ,
a footstep seem'd to fall beside her path ,
vidrik ’s but a blacksmith ’s son . ”
be these your comrades o'er the wave ,
for such absorbing grief , she chides his heart
nisus , euryalus , and turnus fell .
pursefull 's a stickler for the law 's abuse:--
hate is a fear , and fear is rot
what shall i wryte the wo and heuynes
" you little ugly devil , " said i , " go back to hell
to bear the holy hermits o’er ,
for thou art woman , thou art love .
for us , and with us , all the multitudes of things .
then provide me with a bearskin ,
how of thy careless life a night is spent .
when with wand dropping diamonds , and silvery feet ,
or the voice of an old despair
and mornings whose white splendours daze and blind .
by my side and asked me all about our adventures .
yea , a goodly place was mine
the years have never dropped their sand
proves bitter to his seed ; and , on the right ,
god , will it never have done ?
my name is under all men 's ban--
then cease to bore us at our ball !
expressing thought ; the day of philosophic reflection had not yet
though while his white head led the way
and , turning , saw the abbot , who
when the factories all are silenced ,
that rim the rolling heath ,
the story of the tainted blood and what it meant
ay ! towering over his fellows ,
of a small veteran band with whom
are slowly borne to earth , with a dirge of cries .
a youngster was order'd to hold himself ready ,
i saw it,--and this lonely boat ,
" equal honors must be given
my sharing the same fate ?
as the deep cleft in mariposa 's wall
you have seen meadows drenched in bloody dew--
even when its petals flutter to the earth ,
eruptions , earthquakes , comets , lightnings , play
as travellers oft look back at eve
and bunkered it -- behind me .
bade their hands hold lest worse hap came to pass ;
give her a draught of generous wine .
and trembling there it lights a timid smile
undo misrule , and many a volley
through the rain i heard the falling
for them our gracious toil !
and waited trembling for the minute
chaste blossom , ah ! thus , when my own love approaches ,
and he alone desirable , and things
all 's dark to me .   master , if i be blind ,
eternal destiny with weak complaint ;
but as physicians , when they seek to give
and the sleepers need neither victuals nor drink:--
the empty dark swept in and all was night again !
o ! men coming in .
great chiefs who shall rule other far nations ;
triangle with each corner , blunt or sharp .
' tis then broad day throughout the east .
for carelessly thou trustest
facing the guns , he jokes as well
or lawn , when gallus fell by ill - matched love.--wakefield . ]
england 's fame is tumbling down .
that burglars stole that pair away !
before the emeralds , whence love erewhile
and they who dwell in him that rest shall share .
through broken town , and battered market place ,
inept tenor ; even as from branch to branch ,
was summon'd to discharge the forfeiture ,
ne sleepe ( the harbenger of wearie wights )
th ' unwounded bore exulting , grim trophies of the field ,
eastward , in long perspective glittering , shine
the cuirass leaves his shrinking side ,
an ' last it come to me -- not pride ,
the whole world over far and wide ,
it is hard to encounter distress .
that lift their proud tops to the skies ,
with it the lord 's dear flocks and faithful bands ,
kindled and quenched , unto the motion coming
ruled by desire of honor and renown ;
they turned to the land that they loved ,
the large stars glitter thro ' the anxious night ,
' so spake she , but i answered her , saying : " nay , circe , how
to a streamlet still and tranquil ,
some day , to lands where many marvels are ,
thine , hero - father , is the token good :
some further light is thrown on this subject by considering the
robert of sicily , brother of pope urbane
cornice seem to me . thereon our feet had not yet moved when i
all things pass as a dream
and i heard the while that wizard elf
hunting ( and men not beasts shall be his game )
and do the deed she bade .
beat o'er us , and great scaly things
for , lo ! the fated time , the appointed shore :
laodamas , his eldest ; halius , next ,
for us thy son in salem died ,
when the wizard , lemminkainen ,
or joy in its censure , when to - morrow
of gift from god : and here 's my creed .
reveal'd , nor even to his own espoused ,
' tis may morning ,
and still pursu'd , but still pursu'd in vaine .
" i ca n't tell you if i try .
beautiful in a tangle is a thick - maned horse.—ib . p , 28 .
thoughts come , as pure as light
beyond ruffled velvet hills
of others , or my own !
ere with the sun their souls exhale away .
the wind blowing dead out of port ,
wherein our wisest teach us to recall
and you and i will keep ourselves warm .
as here we sometimes in the looks may see
lemuria arose
and die in the peeling steam ? "
and labour till almost dark ;
the mind from memory , and make life all aim ,
the mystical temple of sorrow :
my love , she sleeps ! oh , may her sleep ,
his service from thy slavish neck is broke .
feel the fresh breathing of to - morrow creep .
scarce know the love that loveth at first hand :
where griffins dire and dreadful dragons are .
for saddletree scarce reached had he ,
but her face always showed what her bosom was feeling .
awake!--ne'er heed , though listening night
but whatsoe'er i in the world possess ;
pallas in wit,--all three , if you well view ,
to take one fond look , one last fond adieu ,
bot if so be at time of speche ,
the law of nations or the lore of war ,
who sees all time , sees all eternity .
i a child , and thou a lamb ,
that of goldringes , whiche he drowh
i knew her in her prime ,
in your hearts are the birds and the sunshine ,
and the first thing he worships is terror .
und zwischen trug und wahrheit schwebet
so shall thy presence and thine every motion ,
the dragon - boughts and elvish emblemings
as tho ' they still were living men;--
feasted him slew him , as one slayeth an ox at the stall .
" an ' ben o ' t ' top o ' t ' bank , tha knows ,
two sat here , transport - tossed ,
i rase to theek the stable , o !
which join the euxine to th ' egean sea .
weepers , mournings ( on the steeve or hat ) .
such venerable names , though ne'er was heard
with its beams of silver light
play round the bows of ships ,
i , a dark sepulchral song ,
" a living demon , " he said , " art thou ;
yearning for home .   with laughter ' gan they hale
xliv . such havoc wrought euryalus , so flamed
and banish'd tories to their fields return .
misca ' the great ,
and still , as signs of life appear'd ,
thy lashes down ?
and here 's a green , and here 's a midnight blue ,
he speaks by name to the delighted child !
there dwelt two saints whose privilege sublime
or virgins visited by angel - pow'rs
passages we find , that even where no accusative is expressed , the
and this one , o my tityrus , scarce can lead :
this bethany , lies scarce the distance thence
o pure of heart ! thou need'st not ask of me
the adventures of the hunters ,
wherein were written down
cherish you again ,
" and venture combat with so great a foe ?
remarks : " although the supremacy of jove comes far short of the
come , butter , come
had marked strange lines upon his face :
making the best of roman poets ours ,
this is that night -- no , day , grown great with bliss ,
into tapio 's wild dwellings .
tears dim , such as in mortals ' lie ;
more singly eminent for virtuous deeds .
the wilder nymphs , lov 's power could not comand ,
that crowns the meadow grass .
to say " farewell , o love ! " or just " farewell " !
as to a mountain ,
as down it fell into the other round ,
they had painted his face of a coppery hue ,
the threads , snowy white , from the old spinning - wheel !
will never dine in hall again .
expect me o ' your partie ,
and women waste fair moments
none seconded , as out of season judg'd ,
bore the siege of torturing fears ,
the lord has led us forth ,
unless , by the ploughshare turning the fruitful clods
' tis impious in a good man to be sad .
and wait and watch so late ? "
now round the well her fate she braves ,
her dames were fair of form and face ,
passage to more than india !
courage and patience are but sacrifice ;
lessons that leave no time for prizes .
a waterbury watch that 's slipped a cog ;
and so ( before assistance came )
was thine without defence .
the indian child was startled , and the bird
and thus spake on sweet christabel :
from me shall separate , at once my lips
i care not for spring ; on his fickle wing
the men of france their warrant find in him .
i may , without offence , pretend ,
so well contends with him of sericane ,
on nature 's face -- till the twilight shrouds
flowing down her wrinkled visage ,
satire , is wholly accommodated to the horatian way , and excluding
of the vast multitude , whom various wounds
and know in each a friend and brother !
wal them at need it will rejoice
" the snow , the snow has come at last ! "
why dost thou my attention court ,
standing in suppliant attitude :
by the ever sparkling streams ;
perhaps in his mercy the lord will say ,
sweet , what is love ? the dust beneath our feet ,
to realize her lonely state ,
do us a mischief . "
watering many pleasant valleys ,
to look upon the murderers of this boy ,
as ' tis with us that square our guess by shows ;
and hungers with glutton - greed for the heart
boats gliding like dark shadows of a dream
three miles more to = go ! " " don't= let him go . )
this sweet may - morning ,
we test our lives by thine .
it burns her cheek ; it kindles now
sitting on the arch of heaven ,
and turn those glories that enchant , against thee .
cumberland 's ' poetical epistle to dr . goldsmith ; or supplement
no other man ,
so droȝ þay forth w{i}t{h } gret delyt .
uncle reuben 's gittin ' ole--
and will soon leave these islets of ariel behind .
only in blissful dreams of spring ,
' cauld mould is my covering now ,
they live , they know , they feel , they see .
if there were other with me ; but perceiving
" poor birds ! that know not summer ,
and beautifully ,
( ' ear them say they want their tea , an ' want it quick ! )
ther god us graunte sounde and sone to mete ! '
when as in silks my julia goes , ii . 77 .
apart , with thee to press
thus gave each royal sage advice ,
for a cup to hold his wine ;
when the lips have spoken ,
proud scion of a hundred kings ;
forgot the door - key !
ah , exiles , wandering over many lands !
for the joy of morn arising .
where other children used to play .
are driven o'er the shoals of guilt or ocean of excess :
lindley 's support was withdrawn instantly and roughly .
" ' your name , under the print . '
oh joy ! the signs of life ! the deer
holier than she in eden lost .
i can not look at him for tears ,
their clear images below ,
as to cover the thought ,
who followed christus , held by some a god ,
in every hole the sea came up .
afflicted for his father ’s fate
& ay þe bigest i{n } bale þe best watȝ halden ;
from life 's poor glass has shook his sand ,
with lust of fight she cried to her fellows all ,
noble damoyselle appelee yolande de sallieres estant atteincte et
achilles glared at him and answered , " fool , prate not to me about
but grateful take the good i find ,
it is a mistake to tell anything yourself which the people in the
healthy , free , the world before me ,
that altar is the throne of god .
and makes a potion of the solar ray
or to abridge , and enter down
scarce a leaf was stirred or rustled ,
the lineaments of h -- l 's great potentate !
a young girl in the indolence of her youth ,
from beatrix and good duke aymon sprung .
auld daddy darkness creeps frae his hole ,
over the heads of the crowd , comes wearily back ;
sometimes we call her bella donna . the other was dressed in white
a daughter of the tribe of benjamin--
good - night!--i'd say the griefs , the joys ,
and mercy unto no man / save ruediger they showed .
turned on reaching the headland a man would come up to them and
then equal not our fathers ' deeds with ours . "
stretches its wing to cold oblivion 's shore ;
no arm like his the bow could wield ,
those he would love looked sideways and with fear ,
mos ' place i go dey ask me , " joe ,
spawned of the river , in peace and much good - will ,
scotchman , a wine - merchant , and an art connoisseur , to whom j.
and so they would the other .
he to the woods a hunting went ,
done built her nes ' in a huckleberry root .
and merely help to swell the retinue of the burgundians .
ir ingesinde wol getacn
whose fame by every tongue is told :
utque ego maiores , sic me coluere minores ,
i will that if i say a heavy thing
then , much disturb'd , the cloud - compeller spoke :
us nearer to the wonder of the suns .
into the knight 's old armory he brought him .
and in jordan 's flowing river
you 'll drive away ,
when the sky was clear and cloudless ,
the conquered medians in trunk - breeches stand ;
his fayre belphoebe , could this gardine staine .
a poor coasting pilot he , herve riel the croisickese .
his houses , his lands , and his lordly degree ;
and look my fill into the sky .
they gathered the flowers
after what occurred last night ,
i ask you , is it clamoured by the child ,
ulysses , ruthless chief ! no toils impair
words of propitious omen , and thyself
that faithless craft , which , in thy hour of need ,
to buy him some fruit ,
and thy fingers with spoils of the sassanach maiden :
tak hands , an ' sing a burial ditty
the merry lambs and the complacent kine ,
religious , and without alloy ,
and i 'm just no good , as the people say .
severed , alas ! i carry now my brain
some in life 's winter may toil to discover
or ease the brow of grief .
which , as of inward glory
that watches and receives .
says the twenty , the secret 's too sacred for you ,
they kiss'd his cauld hands , and a smile o'er his face
there in one league of love the stars
aglaïa slept .   we sat :   the lady glanced :
she went to the hatter 's
and while to cure drusilla they essayed ,
and o'er the world of spirits lies
in the heel of the wind - bit pier ,
to meet thee and caress thee for an hour
with friends you stalwart stand and fair ,
an ' owre the hills to nannie , o.
and gods , entangling them in her sweet ditties
where our sweet cousin takes the air ! _
home ! home ! sweet , sweet home !
of peace on earth , good - will to men !
" woe is me , my life hard - fated ,
' twas autumn,--and sunshine arose on the way
by the crimes of thine hands unforgiven they beseech thee to hear
which he with such benignant royalty
from bough to bough ; i 'd sit and bask .
so study your best
mary or ruth , some sisterly , sweet name
if that my sensual deed had stol'n from thee
no longer delay , nor rest night nor day ,
down every crowding alley the urchins leaped
when all your world of beauty 's gone .
to mar thy sacred solitude .
" well , boys , we 'd better see him , and he had n't ought to kick ,
stayed backward at my cry of love ,
what has passed away and perished--
of harps .
briareos or typhon , whom the den
‘ i have been admiral over the sea
sow thou joy and thou shalt keep it .
o'er us , to the southland heading ,
thus for the time he tok his leve .
the happy king , while priest and peer ,
and pours it in a bowl , already crown'd
to which he proffereth war , not tribute pays .
and murmurs at the cross .
to remember one day in a world of pain
told enid , and they saddened her the more :
lo , the last clusters ! pluck them every one ,
and she so mild ?
lo ! what terrific forms around thee wait ,
the looking on it lifts the heart like wine .
heads piled on heads at every door ;
wisdom - bard , and magic singer ,
come every steel blade , and
i think it is the dawn .
instead of common showers ,
i rin an ' fetch them pieces , drinks ,
had struck some quay or bridge - foot stair !
have i watch'd from the windows of life for its coming .
of long chords change - marked with sobbing --
' twould save us many a dollar , and a duel . "
not vault them , the million of rounds of thy mercy not reeve
and fear i stooped to kiss him . one warm drop--
began a blessing to implore !
and heard the heave and plashing of the flow
canto xxxii . rávan roused .
no lo que espero , porque nada espero .
where i reap thou shouldst but glean ,
b. _ its character _ , p.a xx ;
to people eden 's bowers with shapes of love ,
the dark green woods where linnets sing ,
the harvest to the ocean ; all the land
_ kyle _ , a district in ayrshire .
did nature mould thee all so bright .
within its precincts hopes have played , --
hard blows whistle from the bristle
to him by toil and sorrow tried
the pageantry of royal pomp and might
you should have heard the hamelin people
in a moment of dream .
daemon_.]--it is obvious that these gentlemen were in no literal
who never spake more words than these :
to battle , nor did the high gods deem it hard
when,--from where her foot first lightly
stood mistress stavers in her furbelows ,
god bless t ' sailors oot on t ' sea .
this is the righte lyf that i am inne ,
which all wayfarers used to sacrifice . here melanthius son of
their sacred salt here , not a little .
by a water streme .
plans , and that therefrom i came .
we are not wrong , who seek to keep in mind
and left him , gaily prattling
better than all the great parade and pomp
jest a - wearyin ' fer you !
i 'll gie you my bonnie black hen ,
for hir doughter , that gentyll fode ,
ere nessus yet had reach'd the other bank ,
that it went to the walls of the wonderful city ,
chrysoprase and emerald ,
who aped the taste for art or for a leer .
as on every side i stare ,
and yet they made me :
like as the rose exceedeth all flowers ,
' t was built by the same man as built yon chapel ,
were moveless , looking through their dead black years ,
so listen they the reed of thalaba ,
as father to a son ,
while i was gone , and i -- too late --
' and when thy road the stygian river joins ,
" i ask no other in this glorious war .
where the hornets haunt and the mortar drops
their tastes unto the lower end
love and constancy is dead ;
but that the stranger , who had left the grave ,
we , william , kaiser , planted on our throne
slow time a sad nepenthe brought ,
in the midst of my nobles all ;
and inarticulate ardors of the vine .
new courage and intenser faith ,
and knows not if it sighs .
all these are little preludes to possession ,
or is taking what may be a young angel 's share ,
she bent the strenuous heavens and came down
lessons of love and light , but these expanding
they who will not grant me , that pleasure is one of the ends of
oh ! how this tree of mine is hated now by my neighbor !
i have beheld the azure of her gaze
they saw hanúmán near a porch ,
but like the warlike trumpet be the strain
handsome islander and hero ,
canst thou believe i 've lived till now ,
then from thine ivied trance
when eolus hath from his cavern loos'd
to life with life in any beast , and glows ,
though soul and body both must part ,
other , and thus contribute both ways to increase the sum
when shall my longing be realised ?
broken hearts !   god is joy .
thou must be true thyself ,
with long stride making down the beechy glade ,
dropped while the giant bore away
sign of glory ; thou seest it here .
thou hast sullied thine elfin purity
chestfuls does it grind till evening ,
sese theatris explicat .
now has rich time brought you a gift of gold--
i'll -- yes i will -- go back to school .
a terrible rent is torn .
to whom thus adam sore beset repli'd .
screeches .   and tears .
until my closing eyes forget to weep--
i gaily cried , " your fancy 's straying wild .
was i partial to rising early ?
with wondering eyes their supple forms they bend
as a _ dunce _ , who had just been expell'd from his school .
but first amidst them all rose neleus ' son ,
das schwert er viel zu schwer erfand .
and now at last , with him if they would goe ,
thus the long war , from everlasting waged ,
onward she came , and stooping to the floor
the dripping never stops .
the sun will rise betimes , but he must set ;
now give me your hand up.--pick me that flower . "
could risk or compass such strange phantasies ,
why should i -- at the end
but ah ! can these , or those afford delight ?
his entrance , and forewarnd the cherubim
vain man a dodge he ought to know . "
my baby is the flower to me .
the prince , astonished , gave consent ,
and stars , once crimson , hallow many a breast .
they neither considered , nor wanted to know ,
placed her swans upon the river ;
one true - love knot their lives together ties ,
hang empty ' mid the cobwebs of his dreams !
abhorr - ed sighed of kind mortality ,
he on the heathens throws a haughty glance ,
equal to judge -- you're candid to forgive .
there ever wakes an evil wraith
  cf . poem on lessius , lines 18 and 38 . g.
that people they may warm them ;
i care for none of these things .
upon it in the hills where it was hid ;
like beads of amber that are strung
laughing water draws around it ,
give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight ;
from his verdant spring to light ,
come , ye know nothing :   here i pledge my troth ,
touch'd at the dear memorials of his king .
by thee , dire tyrant of the noble mind ,
and clamour overhead ,
which , like the arab chief , would fiercely dare
this senior - junior , giant - dwarf , dan cupid ,
" somehow by thee , dear love , i win content :
know you the fear of age , the torment vile
rose , a blue vault above us , and no shade
" who made no prayers at home !
a hundred leagues from manilla town ,
and pledge each other in red wine , like friends ,
already she hath with her arms so white
her fancy fell a - turning .
sometimes thou art near beside me , but a cloud
from her melodious sea ;
" which simple votaries shall on trust receive ,
hespere , qui caelo fertur crudelior ignis ?
i wot , sweet company for to see .
where gloom perpetual the eye obscures ,
of so fell sacrifice .   be ye more staid ,
informs its tenement . "
for if indeed , blinded by lust and wrath ,
the mother just entering , sarah asks her permission to attend the
good - bye .
cradled in blissful dreams alone he lies ,
public .   pope seems to have known their imbecility and therefore
are hurrying feet ; yet all alone
king rávaṇ is my brother : fame
pardon for this he first entreated ,
to warn a king of his enemies ?
as the big ship , with a bound ,
" o father jove , will none of all the gods
now this i know : when this boy came from school
and country perishing , upon the sands
all as our own , and drive as we were driven ,
' for i am weary , having laboured so ,
in the violet 's hidden sweetness breathes .
under their feet in the grasses
though proud in promise , big in previous thought ,
¡ morir entre los besos de su madre ,
i know not well -- i never knew--
descend , out of the first degree , whose pain
to thrasymedes did he send afar :
his leaping fires in dust and ashes fail ;
wait but the feeblest touch to leap
in his mouth was an opium pipe -- which was why
and nineveh , a city sinking slow
mid wranglings of the forum or the mart ;
its mean ambitions , its scant fantasies ,
i ate with you and slept with you , your body has become not yours
the torturous hike up the hill road ,
though shared by miss butcher
the fleet , and ship their men with silent care ;
these two frenchmen are named salvette and bernadou . they are
take thou up the malt and taste it .
like empty shaddowes , did afflict my brayne , )
his spear , they shook them in a brazen casque ;
with subtle skill in the amorous air ;
of venus , incurred the resentment of that goddess , and were
and shows his naked flitches ,
seek surer sign of it than what is found ,
the trunk , disfigured , stiffens in its gore .
then he calls mr . jones ,
for fear of little men ;
from god , gandharva , yaksha , fiend ;
more boundless than the depth of night
her choice of him , should kind occasion nod ,
with cruel caressing dealt a mortal blow ,
no one ever knew--
at tibi ne possit se tam bene bruma negare ,
i make the whole world answer to my art
but the ears of cunning workmanship which yet remained to be
the good gherardo , of palazzo he
that trusty timber should tear away .
you , a young and untried hero ,
the task were scarce as hard .
nor sole for them perhaps , but for the mothers ,
is given in outline and no more .
i remember the day .
thou hast eaten what i needed ,
which hate - enraged can burn a steady flame ,
and oft on the hurrying blast ,
his substance .   slayers , and each one that smites
grass stands a dignified middle - aged brick house .   a dwarfed
a goddess , with a siren 's grace,--
right in we went , with soul intent
wagon - wheel to father 's arms , like so much country
( 3 )   " clasps " or " brooches " were used to fasten the dresses in
“ ’ tis custom in my father ’s land
first blest my wondering eyes ;
clogged on his heart as his brush with mud ,
oneiza called him brother , and the youth ,
even this falls from me , yet thou call'st me son .
and the hot tear - drops down her cheek ,
but nae smile was seen on kilmeny 's face ;
by wizard 's or by leech 's art be done ,
o mother , hear us .
and the true order of perfyte charite
“ endeavoring ; which while compass'd with both arms
remorse is memory awake ,
còn una escòba muy sùcia y muy vièja ...
and then , meseemed , she lightly laughed and sighed ,
and to strip you to rags ,
and float amid the liquid noon :
i bring thee war and peace closed in this lap ,
but armed at point with every view
now the bright morning star , day 's harbinger ,
and their eyes recovered their sight , you know ;
he comes with tidings and a song ,
now seventeen days were in the voyage past ,
never yet hit on , which , he feels ,
she kept an album , too , at home ,
thou doest emmarble the proud hart of her
i to my chimney 's shine
and when this wondrous tale was o’er ,
her _ knots _ disordered , and her wholesome herbs
we sow on burmah 's barren plain ,
saving his olde father egeus ,
then back to arthur , and with querulous cries ,
he will as truly own
grasped he then the sword of battle ,
her streaming eyes , wrung hands , and flowing hair
and patriots riding royally ,
" i have arisen like a dawn -- the world ,
omnes sulpiciam legant mariti ,
she saw within nothing : but o'er her sight
no louder now than falling leaves .
the guiders of thy silver hairs ;
of men embattled deeps beyond all thought
through the trance of silence ,
and no remorse , nor memory from its grave
and edward be the lord ;
the stigma of scared years -- are we to get
here on this spot of earth . search , thea , search !
marry me and prove me , and say soon you will
- now in his joy he grew aware
the heart asunder;--then , as more or lees
like blood of a heart that bleeds .
to join the smoke that wreathed itself above .
entangled where the willows lean .
" and lost the _ twice one hundred pounds a year _ .
silks that glowed with fire of tawny oxus gold ,
did i not place you in that bunk
the cause of beauty given to man 's desires
make me quick two worthy snow - shoes ,
such trojan hosts , whose trophies grace the plain .
and the swineherd strewed for telemachus green brushwood
times again , now mostly just after sunrise or before sunset ,
were driven betwixt woe and mirth
and hears aloft a clamour wailed ,
when the creel o ' herrin ' passes ,
law , life , and light , on the world 's way ,
" come back when you win a prize . "
all unconscious of his greatness ,
" loose me from thy magic power ,
and the swallows float and flee .
and seemed with tender irony to flout
the moon soars white above the stony street ,
that i may make my purpose known . this day
uncared for , the brook will babble
how manners often falsely paint
of waggons , with their awnings arched and tall .
to make their forces greater ,    ' proaching nigher ,
chanted knells the ghostly hymn ;
he came al so still
as to some lovely temple , tenantless
while the proud victor thus his fall derides .
though such an one should bear within his breast
ingenious sparkles . skillful she extends
as o'er the grass the dew .
this part is nam'd from ilium , that from troy ,
imagined nothing better , naught more dear ,
as if he were a god . for he is far the best man of them
then whirl the wretch from high
our hopes go out in tears ,
with his bony fingers he
but yet whose actions far transcend your fame ;
with white down the middle , and melaneus , and lachne , with a
the hospitalities of every land ;
though their forms are fashioned ill ,
myrmidons ! all that vengeance now inflict ,
as that stream calm my life shall be ;
they huddle ' round the doorway ,
you start , you little kids , you think these are not pretty names ,
in my stone niche , and two owls passed me by ,
for the amusement of the nation .
" tonitrus et cespes ! " dixit johanes breitmann .
hover over my delight !
to kiss her pale , white face ,
something is hidden in the mystery ,
the fire that late had burnt fell slack
" you -- and your country ! "
who purchase both their red and white ,
and mine , my wife -- my daughter -- my sturdy climber of trees
_ multitude . _ no proofs ? no evidence ?
row thy boat throughout the veinlets ,
in a simile descriptive of the morning :
'cause i see a woman 's curst ?
from thy father 's fields and forests .
fear not the stillness ; for doubt and despair shall cease
the turf , tartarus ' coals of rest--
i walk over the mountains and the waves ,
an ' dat wus w'at de fuss wus 'bout .
and home we brought you shoulder - high .
o pansy - violet ,
so me he leave not , angry , on the floor!--
to single fight the boldest foe defied ;
in twelve fair ships , with crimson prows adorn'd .
snatched from the toils of war and thy high duties ,
of piling bags along the parapet ,
and from all sides
and in his heart the glory of the sea ;
ere casalodi 's madness by deceit
_ whom does madans secret arrow spare ? _
in this era of advancement ;
not a symptom of surprise
then shall the horrid pall
where at noon - day his prayer he made
from high balistas and the shielded throng
even to the foot and second , his hand shook
et dum fluminibus mora est ,
and gratitude may thus move more
i might as well be born a copper khan ;
alas ! alas ! for breaking hearts when lovers rove away .
gone ! and we can only dream of you
last advices from india -- sir archy , ' tis thought ,
quick through the gates sumantra hied ,
magic dew in topaz cup ,
and we all groped out together , dazed and blind , we knew not why ;
o'er the boundless sea ,
by pain or prayer or priest , and never , never ,
in the blessed gravy then .
to crown my lady of the may !
he has taken toll of the north and the south--
and , as the tear bedimmed her eye ,
hiroshima should call
as lightly she loosens her showery locks
that pours , in a garden deserted , its streams ,
to justice and to truth , how might i choose
i looked on the horse of a cart ,
shall find the toppling crags of duty scaled
still the fair pearls that graced his forehead tell
is ornament well suits the breast that wears it .
is wasting an hour upon you .
if _ also _ thro ' the nose they 'll pay .
for sure they did not seeme
stay!--and the nearest woman seventeen miles away .
till skiddaw saw the fire that burned on gaunt 's embattled pile ,
alternat mira arte fides ; dum torquet acutas
" oh haste -- the bark that bore me hither
when in and came her seven brothers ,
with so much good will are wholly in his honour , and any one
went he , whispering soft and low :
youth so apt to pluck a sweet !
and my doom comes to me surely--
it might be found
have n't as good . they do n't go with the farm .
named them , every one , as she went up and down .
kill me in their fury , but the king protected me , for he feared
are sweeter far
and he crieth kind to greyfell , and they hasten up , and nigher ,
awake to all that injured worth can feel ,
who all applauded hector 's ill advice ,
i 've been fooled to the top of my bent here ,
rise up , and curse him on his throne of fire .
but actor and idæus take that flaming misery ,
i am naturally of a superstitious cast , and as soon as my
to the tempe from the heaven ,
you saved the ship of state from foul disaster
can ruminate , but cleaveth not the hoof ;
if the grim brood , from arctic shores that roam'd ,
the achaeans , mindful of their prowess , bore straight down upon
la pestilente fiebre respirando ,
day smiteth day in twain , night sundereth night ,
darting it full against a kitten 's nose ;
( themselves now but cold imagery )
fair cadiz , rising o'er the dark blue sea !
one after other in that last fight of all .
breaks the oak - wood pole in pieces ,
of claimants here none 's more nor less ,
hymen , late , his love - knots selling ,
the red room with the giant bed
and those the laughing satyrs join !
mix'd up of delicates for every sense ;
oh love , more helpless love , why bloom so late ,
gauge it with a fretful frown ;
then oaks for oars they fell'd ; or , as they stood ,
and you must love him , ere to you
' we doubt not that .   o yes , you missed us much .
as i pleaded for moctheuzoma
thy vengeance prevails !
soon to be ended . i may wake no more
or fergusson , the writer - chiel ,
to cease from every evil ,
victorious men of earth , no more
the camp at great jerusalem arrives :
while he spoke
for so thou mayst debarred be of blis ,
do minish the level seas ; in part because
hurrah for wine and freedom still !
in the moon of leaves he built it ,
i 've been a thousand miles astray . "
for none dare find their faults , who eat their bread .
with rapturous wings -- still dwindlingly--
for you know not turja 's language ,
to the fowl whose fiery eyes now burnt into my bosom 's core ;
thus far i speak to thee
than hinny or than marmalete ;
while from his herd he slowly strays ,
a constant critic at the great man 's board ,
oh , night and stars , return !
in what a grand democracy of death
my lord is absent at the great debate ,
among thick trees the hunter hath his whelps
by hawthorn tree and foxes ' den ,
what the magic that charms the glad babe in her arms ,
to this dead thrush a tear i gave--
' twas not that organ half - divine ,
lie still my treasure !
that sweeps with all its autumn bowers ,
far distant flew dispersed her head - attire ,
that wrap her as the leaves the rose .
how once in the gloom of a strange long night
of her aery finger - tips
for these are the men that will die for their charlie !
and o'er the dark her silver mantle threw .
making lament with many an ivory yawn ,
misguided youth ! with rude unclassic rage
to soffre as socrates tho dede :
than , through and by that love , she knows she can ;
within thy inmost soul ,
the arrow glanced aside , and carried death
out little stick      if it still is within !
even carlo dolci 's features
that blanched the buxom beauty of their cheeks ,
perverse , all monstrous , all prodigious things ,
who blacks the boots at the savoy .
the innocent hearts of maids . long time i held
persuaded that the lord would make amends .
and home and home and home he ever sings .
and he will remember the suffering tory :
the chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain ;
famous;--hence , suristan , the land of roses .
and defend all that women can earnestly feel .
of the actual bolt , your pastime circumvents .
it seem'd that art and nature had assembled
my hand inclining , answer'd :   " sir ! brunetto !
where heaps of flowers were fresh and sweet ,
a traveller came to the well of st . keyne ,
chosen vessel went thither to bring thence comfort to that faith
" this sacrifice in essence of two things
thought . but in order that the sacred love , in which i watch with
or aught disparaged by those labors base ;
but , with omen pure and meet ,
my temples , and immerg'd me , where ' t was fit
now he hears the angels ' voices
secrets that all in turn would hear;--
" o moment irrecoverably lost !
and did not dare to attack them ,
that wisdom . i forget not yet the day
yet spoke together , came again with one ,
if you can dream -- and not make dreams your master ;
whose garlands dead ,
guard it more closely each swift - flying day ;
thou art more lovely and more temperate :
knew well amphimedon , for he had been
but appius reddens at each word you speak ,
he has awakened : but not thin or wan
this i 'll tell ye by the way :
bless to both nations this auspicious hour !
' someone else can . ' ' then someone else will have to . '
the sable - stoled sorcerers bear his worshipped ark .
with an unquiet eye
defend vs from our foes and thine .
with hissing brands , attempt to burn the sea ,
and the blood beats in the vein ,
raised his mighty bow of ash - tree ,
fire his own ship -- and , blazing to the bay ,
give me them,--and the peace of mind , dearer than all !
the bobolinks at noonday sing
' now let me say good night , and so say you ;
at those high words , we conscious of ourselves ,
ere that disguised angel men call woe
nor grandeur hear , with a disdainful smile ,
i became suddenly revealed in benares , and râmânanda illumined
giveth a year 's worth of gain ;
hung o'er the dark and melancholy deep ,
so we had to clean this one with sand and brown - paper before we
and the world is very wide , to a horse that is n't tied ,
where the prince whom she must we d
he nothing common did or mean
gethsemane ! when day is done
as one that mingled in our mirth ;
kissed his knees , and he saved me and delivered me , and
“ to - morrow , ere folk to breakfast go ,
with us ( no longer new and smart ) ,
his face ! the sun is of an ashy pale ,
on his pure altar , strange , forlorn , thrice - orphan .
that noble nature into cold eclipse ;
she owed him that to keep the balance straight .
their wives made captive , their possessions shared ,
every eye there like a spoke in you centering ,
do you bloom in belgium now ? _
and all so small and slow
they two together had achiev'd ; the toils ,
return , to fill or mend the quire of thy celestial kind .
a league but barely three ,
thirdly , when married , she appears as a wicked and heartless
on which the observant man , who fills a throne ,
down from me , down from me ,
this reflection concerning babel , which i find in no
my spirit also sprang to life anew ,
and in his diligence his duty shows .
the sweets , they warmed at their bosoms divined , discerned .
remote , with water well supplied . ”
i know a maiden fair to see ,
his days of service long were past ,
mother , let us imagine we are travelling , and passing through a
or upland fallows gray
time - trenched on cheek and brow ,
to - day , on high
semele .            oh , beroe !
sore troubled , but resolved to show
the misfortunes of one are the entertainment of many .
charles the king his snowy beard has clasped ,
and she pondered and reflected ,
things as i 've found out one by one--
" wo n't you follow me ? wo n't you follow me ? "
{ 135 } modern excavations establish the existence of two and only
substance , and accident , and their operations ,
" dear grandpa keeps christmas in heaven
thou wilt not with predestined evil round
attend it from its primal source ,
i keep my countenance , i remain self - possessed
( _ on his appearance at sandringham . _ )
lætis occuluit tristia . qui bona
thou art but stone or clay . "
had we never lov'd sae blindly ,
heard a rustling in the branches ,
with two or three companions whom it chanc'd
of making only coin and lives to count it in ,
in youth she was all glory,--a new tyre,--
power , receiving intelligence from the sister , would employ the
and set it up on high ,
scarce venturing to claim ; and falter'd much
done so . furthermore i say -- and lay my saying to your heart -- the
a regnant peak that seemed to seek the coronal of night .
as sleek 's a mouse , as round 's an apple ,
they sound as through the whispering of trees ,
i call ye , and declare ye now ; returned
the western sunbeams now were bent .
the secret torture and the public shame .
those painted clouds that beautify our days , & c.
as a servant , i came to seek to win you affections .
on these the princes of phæacia sat ,
whose home is under mountain walls
that 's eight times to - day you have kiss'd me before . "
he burst upon those pallid lifeless days ,
for her shameless wagging hints
hunt the hare upon the heather ;
from me bring her fair compliment / and from brunhild beside ,
los ojos moribundos
your many are more merrily alive
he put it in a box ;
heaven be praised for an appetite ,
when squalid beggary , for a dole of bread ,
and on the washie oose deep channels wore ;
of the blood will talk with you like a reasonable being , but if
the nails were through its hands and feet .
lo , she stands up,--stands up e'en now ,
that fitful moonlight on the unknown path ;
then , sweetest , attend , while i answer to thee .
who brought untold misfortunes on herself
something of his transcendent grace ,
" osmotar , the beer - preparer ,
for ' unger , o ' course , is the finest sauce ,
for a new soul let whoso please pray ,
odorous , which the fishy scent subdued .
cephalenia . it was in the ionian sea , and formed part of the
nor look back , save to learn the lesson
to the wide world past the river ,
full and triumphant : there doth lie the prize
pussicat , wussicat , with a white foot ,
adam was all in tears , and to his guide
men and maidens , faint and famished ,
my friend , thou sorrowest for thy golden prime ,
forget , forget,--
that fann'd my face and whisper'd : " blessed they
with heaven for our guide ,
and all the mighty demons , fed
an ' when he went to bed at night , away up stairs ,
at last the dead man walked no more
she fastens , and shall yet to many more ,
his narrow bounds prescribed restrain
with prayer and praise to tell ,
save that he holds by main of arms and might .
the queen of love her favour’d champion shrouds
“ well mark'd her eyes the place,--and well the tree ;
she grabs ' is pockit knife , an ' ends ' er cares ...
aut tmaros aut rhodope aut extremi garamantes
steal their way to the heart ,
till everything he loved was gone .
his wrath , like jove 's , could bear with no controul ,
o creatures vnkynde leue ye this outrage
the brightest wit can find us ;
the sinless , peaceful works of god ,
water .   he marvelled , seeing achilles ' steeds
' i froze him stiff and i fogged him blind .
for always to harden one 's fiddlestrings thus ,
watch , minute , instant , as they flee ,
thro ’ the airy mountains stray ,
its robe was sable , but a fleecy white
when the morning dawn’d upon the morrow ,
thenkinge how she , for whom desyr him brende ,
“ perhaps you may think that this bird , which lives upon prey , and
easily the ship moves onward .
if a slimmer - paunched henchman will hurry with me ,
kind folks of old , you come again no more .
and no one fears , or hates it , on the sod .
my merry , merry boys ,
with him ’ twill sorely , sorely fare . ”
and ye laugh at each turn of the game ,
to hold thou art there , for all no face we see ;
we met in mirth -- we part wi ' pain ,
hath ever travel'd ?   such are they dwell here ,
the flood may bear me far ,
sed potes , _ publi _ , geminare magnâ
great god , i ask thee for no meaner pelf , 120 .
far fairylands beyond some silent sea .
and fit , and fit , and fit ! !
and , listening to the inner flow of things ,
brander ( _ pounding on the table _ )
to excel all women in beauty of form and understanding ; diana
( pond'rous with shaggy mane and golden paws )
murdered in his own stronghold of campagnatico , in 1259 .
hymns of the highlands -- hosannas from hills by it ,
from pole to pole the winds diffuse the sound ,
had planted it when faith was taught by fear ,
even in his outcast hour , when curst
to win her grace , whom all commend .
_ a. _   ille meis pacem dat montibus : ecce per illum ,
outside canossa 's guarded gate ,
against the evils of discontent and envy
yes ! there the old bay hero stood ,
fore'er o'er all
to - night in harvard square .
that second time they hunted me
not by her side are they won
that doth not in her sunshine share .
they would not rest in settled land :
but every stage we draw more nigh
all the vessel shook and trembled ,
the old name sweeter sounds to me
twittered the prelude and the voice sang :
and death you despise ,
whilst the wine - cup shines in light ;
i fancied had shadowed my whole life with gloom ,
of angels there came a company
that the ill luck 's to fall upon his head .
and the boat was fair to gaze on ,
" no reasons on the other side ! "
' and riddle us both as one ;
compose thy thoughts and banish fear .
for a god goes with it and makes it store
o sat erit tergo me potuisse vehi .
all thy loveliness will end .
be bound by military laws ,
to whom , with stern regard , ulysses thus :
there , heard you not the alp - hound 's bark ?
shall perish so like bear or lion .
iamque mari magno classis cita
' twixt sleep and waking , vaguely horrible ,
that they a native epitaph shall weep ;
all heaven rings back , sonorous with regret ,
( in an anger then i cried)--
now as we trudged -- o deadly day ,
and struck her , as she soar'd , beneath the wing ;
and thus the important talk pursued .
he hadde of conseil manyon ,
by day , full many a fathom deep
with this he closed ; and through the audience went
but just between them seeming .
there were thousands of millions of stars .
each wandered lonely through false day
eas'd in one accent his o'er - burden'd soul ,
but in her beauty -- sometimes deckt
who toil not , loving dainty fare ,
gathers so lively virtue from thy beams ,
into a comfortable tete - a - tete ,
and , deeper guilt , that i have borne them . let them die ;
with me in dreadful harmony they join ,
yo sud a seen locker - taaners brandishing ther nives ,
and bow - armed lakshmaṇ by his side :
and gathering from the sands a shell ,
with john , their brother , in his shorts ,
that i journeyed -- i journeyed down here--
with cheerful words allay'd the common grief :
" the time i 've lost in
i allers ' ed a go .
but it 's " stay on the bench ! " for kid o'shay ,
of odin , the delights of other days ,
so she follows from land to land
that glist'ring grove , the curled wood of gold ;
here for eight months and there for three
pefore dey dook dis form .
abject the image which is there discerned showed thee !
as oft the clouds frame shapes of castles great
if washed in jesus ' blood ,
however old , however strong ,
a seed of sorrow to the tuscan race . "
with the cross upon his bosom ,
in the railway 's clash and clang ,
_ rose . _     { this promise he never will break .
and had in many a battle been ;
thy lucid waves are flowing ,
of human thought and knowledge mine , in vain ;
( ll . 2846 - 2849 ) then the mighty lord made a trial of the prince ,
_ freenge _ , fringe .
how hath one black eclipse cancell'd , and crost
one from a hundred feather’d deaths he chose ,
that banner in the sky ;
how love and sympathy with potent charm
which is not of the pangs that pass away;[mg ]
o'ermasters and drags down the soul
glow - worm in the highway rut ,
gray and heavy blanket , folding , covering all .
wisely arranges his affairs ,
yes ! did they give courtesy , did they give time ,
blind with the light , and strucken dead with wonder .
" i have slain old wainamoinen ,
( when bison used to roam on it )
and it must follow , as the night the day ,
“ my time is come , i ca n’t survive ;
to see the long white fleeces upward roll ,
pecking the grain that scatters from the sheaves ;
when the battle rages loud and long
for your sole sake -- that all heart 's ache have known ,
and the council looked dispirited , though hardly broken - hearted ) .
the lowest sot , the drunk'nest liar ,
deep , in wide caverns and their shadowy ailes ,
by other , or through his own weakness fail ? "
or music 's harmony divine .
inconvenience from one 's excerpted foreskin , but one would defend
in modern fashion and device , and of his misery that fell upon
the battle , and blind game of mars a little while debate . '
there 's a whisper of life in the grey dead trees ,
the loaded wain , and the poor animal
i say : " oh , but you orter seen the pettibone shef doover ! "
marvelled to see the glory of loveliness
whilst thus they proceeded , a wolf from the wood ,
but he who looks in folly 's tempting eyes ,
lily that blooms in some lone , leafy nook ;
if one or both , assisted in the plan ,
yet pride , that fortune humbles not ,
and when a good child goes to bed ,
steered south and west along the coast to seek the tropic seas ,
of all the world , we peck at and are filled .
is butchery , sometimes a single sorrow
voices come o'er the line ;
of those ill spirits both to god displeasing
and when i remember how just at the time she died
i care not what they praise , or what they blame .
where through the vales the mazy waters stray ?
left the meadows that he crossed
in your visions manifold !
_ everybody here
for i could never fathom
y hay un pueblo prosternado
then with sweet modesty and joy opprest
desert me not , " i cried , " in this extreme .
now let us sing , long live the king ,
weighed down with grief , and pale with fear ,
save thou should'st shine alone for me .
the host that now is sorrowing after thee
momentous question ! femininely human !
beneath your high protection ;
whence i replied : " if thou recall to mind
past the foxgloves .
stone threshold and came inside . ulysses rose from his seat to
now wonder turns to love ;
warm kisses on your face !
mahng , the loon , the wild - goose , wawa ,
a mile above sea - level ,
from mouth to mouth in rose - bowers ,
which will give speedy motion to the pen ,
a little smear of dust .
was lapis vegetabilis ,
' iucundasque puer qui lamberat ore placentas . '
no later light has lighted up my heaven ,
bathes in the brook      ere the beacon appears ,
sent from her through the wide transpicuous aire ,
“ appears,--in garments such as fishers clothe .
without a grave , unknelled , uncoffined , and unknown .
of sacrifice , his guards clearing the way
watch - tower or summer - house , where oft , at eve ,
from this narrow place of resting ,
to their countries again ,
he is there where the tiller is tilling the hard ground and where
so they said to the lynott , ' here , take our bird !
the glee of our merry - voiced crew .
and you 'll no longer swing and sway
thurgh his vertu , and to receive
regarded , such delight till then , as seemd ,
he spoke , and sat : when nestor , rising said ,
' tis sad that , after all these years ,
and a smile his throne .
which , even in this dread moment , fond
before mine age had to its fullness reach'd .
  the second circle below , the eighth in the order of hell .
warm with its fervour , mellow with its light ,
said the young man , softly laughing ,
then came we to the confine , where disparted
through phoebus ' fostering heat ,
whither whirlest thou thy thrall ?
through their heads and caps sprout upward ,
land sometimes by the roving shepherd - swain
upon the physical , just the very thing
the goat was from the west , a graduate of a prairie college of
the timorous killdee starts and stops
i followed him , and little had we gone ,
another daughter he presently met ;
and thou must see!--o christianity !
is not blind cupid . ah , bright boy ,
why is thy plumage marred , and why
as when a monstrous cloud , in evil hour ,
oh big red poppy ,
old halban tranquil sits , and on the face
long ere the quarter was a half ,
o baptis ' come , come hoe de corn ,
and of a baron stout and bold
in this ungodly action .
i had consulted coke and cruise and chitty ,
laugh , dance , and sing in sunny glade ,
about the way to sing a song !
so much success      the soldier - troop won ,
which upon thy fresh cheek grows ;
and seems a cloud descended on the earth ,
spirits of heaven unseen are there ,
and of our scouts who captured riel ,
but far o'er the ocean the spinner 's fame
thus addressed the fire - devourer :
less hard , more transient far
and each the time with th ' other in gentle converse spent .
and lay in the darkness , grunting , and turning to his rest .
and great achilles , lest some greek ’s advance
its cratest shoy a vild gallop ,
that in all the land      most beloved is he
" yet you shall soon be master ; lay fear and sorrow by ;
ven , sueño alegre , sueño , ven , dichoso ;
she is robed in the neatest of vestures .
happy kingdom ! lucky king ! _
still of his aim is wide , in that the one
deceived the wintry hours away ?
meanwhile to high olympus fled the maid ,
like moths into the grass with folded wings .
and master wanted once to buy it,--
but kick us , kick us hard , we 've got no friends ,
into a cider press 's gripe ;
glides freely , and no obstacle prevents .
and matchless grace ,
you will wrong your own beauty .   the graces of art ,
and every drop was wine , was heavenly wine !
within the stalls , and snakes of noxious smell
are strong . we are weak from the loss
both mongrel , puppy , whelp , and hound ,
contra un clavo sujetan de la américa un pie ;
" why did'st weep , o väinämöinen ,
... the mildest birth ,
with the introduction of scientific studies the author of the
of that schal be no maner nede ,
what happier natures shrink at with affright ,
in the same hour , from this world 's limits torn ,
in his face the look of trouble ,
on the rain - pool at my feet .
the cavalier unknown , i said above ,
the cloudy splendour raised our hearts
thus they in heav'n , above the starry sphear ,
and show'd the belly to me , whence a smell ,
his beauty these , and those his blooming age ,
quartus ab his serie temporis ipse fui .
the virgin sisters pass beneath the shades ;
is wroth and gret vengance doth .
his purse was at his side , his mantle was for me ,
as earthly hopes abused are less than hopes divine .
what thing soever ye may hear , or see ,
that with no costlier viands than the juice
a white vest broidered black , her person deck ,
on an endless voyage gone;--
for all at once they hear the birds ' soft strain .
i am weary .
and all the heavy pain within his heart
through the shaken lengths of her veined streets ...
who waited until your head was gray ,
i had a robber 's cavern at the foot
inferior ideals , can never adequately requite his love , yet nobly
the public 's first servant , and humble in station ;
prayer is innocence ' friend ; and willingly flieth incessant
by shady wood , or winding rill ;
and grief and sickness fled away .
deeming she can , if she resolves to die ,
and yoke thee with iron , proud queen of the just !
and knitted jaunty nightcaps to protect him when abed !
i followed , carrying
something lies in the room
or with the stream makes pure his lips !
bore and beheld sorrows unspeakable ,
sacred soil of hieroglyph ,
all in goodly order mingled ,
when memory takes me back again to scenes i used to know .
and thou in truth com'st from it .   ye , who live ,
this is the end of faust 's career through the world of private
lucid in the moon , raise lilies to the skyfields ,
or to which half of heaven it turns , or how
knyght{es } semlyd on a rowe ,
till coward death behind him jumpit ,
the arctic circle and hot meroe 's strand ,
upon a summer 's day ;
their spectral robes -- his memory 's sole behest .
and jove answered , " juno , you need not be afraid that either god
to put your trust in god alone ,
like a city , round the sun :
" horseman , springing from the dark ,
that lit the drummer from the camp
' gainst all the world i 'll shield him , i give you here my word ,
that thine like his may be a deathless name .
" in thee resplendent is the godhead shown ;
the live - long day , for you i toil and fret ;
howe erthe comythe to erthe nakyd alle day .
little thinks , in the field , yon red - cloaked clown
and seen afar , youth 's gallant trophies , bright
monsieur denies his note ?
the benediction of unbroken rest,--
i enjoy'd the universal silence ,
will covet more .   with this advantage then
and quotes thy treacheries to prove it true ?
whose fall in vain i strived to withstand ,
here , truths divine in easy language flow ,
and all alike were false , all but delay
whose thoughts are full of indices and surds ?
thine image in the waters of my breast .
where yudhishthira tarried . sákra led
and tom bears logs into the hall ,
in penance for the past , death 's full forgetfulness .
a blackness in his morning light ;
what further would be learnt .   live while ye may ,
from the other came a young man ,
' and if my dearest friend were dead
vine loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about
by the hope within us springing ,
prostrate he fell , and meges stripp'd his arms .
said , " the gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and
thin , airy shoals of visionary ghosts :
lightning of revelation into the murk
del español condestable
church extension hints ,
then humility takes its root
" she is won ! we are gone ! over bank , bush , and scaur ;
love 's cherries from such fires grow
and read their manuals for the making truce
her gentle task to waft to longing ears
would weep for him his children dear . "
like an artist that 's busy in melting his lead ,
that he is going to give the goblet ; he never gives it .
sang in tones of deep emotion ,
and the rust had invested his vest .
" thy health , my love , in heaven or hell ! "
and magic tongue had doom'd . medea leads
vanae et cor leve gloriae .
with jovial laugh they feasted ;
worked smooth , and at the bottom was a door .
half - hid in leaves its mimic berries glow ;
unto my lonely god :
and all our church grew dark and cold ,
to fear or fight , or drave them on with edge of sword to close ?
and some socks , soon as i go ,
for where in the north does such goodness repose ?
and cowering foes shall sink beneath
coming through the rye .
inferences as to their character
nowhere i sojourn but i thence depart ,
she left lonely forever
but de thorold 's guests beheld nought there
to sit beside her on the wooden steps .
thou art the silent messenger of ages ,
because provoked and chosen .
yet never should the word be said
we wait beneath the furnace - blast
evil - born and evil - nurtured ,
that fought aurelian , and the roman brows
with two loaves of bread then they fed it , instead
i 'm sick and tired and bored with me ;
as e'er was fought on the border side ! "
empeste la brise .
for such a noticing .
i have come to learn from you
the eye of heaven 's all - judging witness , he shone .
dressed in beauty is the bridegroom ,
unmeaningly the law 's intent ;
then comes the sad thought that -- he is not there !
and light is mingled with the gloom ,
ne're courted _ daphne _ with a brighter ray !
then outspake sir siegfried : / " if serve her aught i can ,
the sons of priam -- pyrgo was the dame,--
that waked the priest all shaven and shorn ,
bolts.--save her!--who was it plunged her into perdition ? i or
the nectared bowl , the choral swell !
þat is he þat ful ofte hatȝ heuened þy fader
let us see which will last the longer or mow the stronger , from
paverit innocuis epulis .
i must glide on , i dare not feast mine eye ,
that neither pleased was to have the rayne
i 'll build me and the prophet 's may despise ,
excitement , i reckon , o ' breakin ' it to her so suddent-
in shops and public places , in the church ,
to kill her infants in their prime ,
no stall - fed mammon , for his gold , reveres ,
to proper spheres , my friends ! yourselves confine !
with fire and sword they harried / and laid the country waste ,
her word at length had plighted / the monarch etzel 's wife to be .
at the top is a little close - shut door .
with dower of many idler things ;
mer , vous avez suivi les sentiers de l’océan . l’hiver agitait
and as i ran i heard 'em call ,
if i hedant come to pray ,
who were over fond of ' swinging '
great triumph and rejoycing was in heav'n
but , oh ! you 've wholly lost the youth
swiftly he turned his back ,
no friend of thine ,
i tell thee , from vain tears abstain !
just over my neighbour ’s wall .
in order , quit of all impediment ;
o golden robin , skyey - nested ,
á otra persona en madrid.--
and in the centre of that spot , which lay
and a boar to neptune . { 90 } then go home and offer hecatombs to
she o'er the sand the fainting ball convey'd ;
no less than that old crone on vengeance bent :
found the people in confusion ,
we can not say where lies the greatest pain ,
when ever that shall be ; so fate pronounc'd .
and the perfume as poison and wine to the brain , a delight and a
fine boy ! has travelled everywhere ,
and , lo ! i saw the like fair scenes were there ,
o for the voice -- of what ? of whom?--what voice
why did my heart not haste ?
inoȝe is knawen þ{a}t man - kyn grete ,
and you , who never fell from pride :
" i know a bank where the wild thyme blows ,
sight thou didst get of him . ah ! i pray thee , if ever at
they hide in the sun , they flare and dance in the night ;
than never felt this tyrannous alone !
and this was all the harvest that i reap'd--
the ear , it strikes like lightnings to hear him sing ;
out of the finite dark ,
and who chose her from all that love instead :
lights her beacon , flooding the earth with silver ,
of that grim conflict , saw where never ceased
but greater cares sit heavy on our souls ,
and the work swelled and mounted higher ,
wearing it down your back like marguerite !
the trains of many a primal god ,
what is the life you can give to a child of the sun and the sea ? "
o woman !
when , having wept all night , at break of day
the spot was made by nature for herself :
last o’er the dead the milk - white veil they threw ;
in hushed and breathless beauty 's name ,
king charles , and who 's ripe for fight now ?
of sensual life , bringing contrariousness
ruht lächelnd doch auf dir , auf dir ,
and fly i well know whither ,
bright as the fabled element which fills
to the distant home of strangers ,
" i speak the truth : you are my child .
the things thou namest being complete
do not go to war , i pray thee .
ther was an yle , which colchos
( ' twas the sabbath ) , we were talking
thrice happy bard who wrote such words as these ,
sweetest place of all ?
the wolfe etis the shepe , the great fysshe the small
in the ooze they were not wasted ,
the heifer comes in the snow - storm , and here
and you to have been the bridegroom . '
and music of her woods -- no works of man
and leave my heather blooms .
which called thee once to slumber . here the stars
what ! does that patient much - enduring elf
_ the duke shall arm the field _ .
and bells ring in the christmas time:--
draped like a statue , in strings like a scarecrow ,
who , when we court and kiss ,
with startled reverence , and proudly stand ,
i can get away with that .
lived under a hill ,
again to take a husband , and be again undone .
and by their prayers auspicious blessed ,
that a party of his enemies were come to seize his person . the
death is fruition , why then should we fear it ?
john davis emptied it at one mighty draught ,
lent desolation to night ; and low
as erst thy handmaids , when , with brow serene ,
in the house the tubs kicked over ,
motions , colours , and proportions of these being presented to our
to the god 's asking look , nothing daunted , replied ,
come , good myrson , tell me true ! "
his own name over all .
ph[oe]bus , wi ' gowden crest , leaves ocean 's heaving breast
in vain -- evasive ever through the glade
days sailing , odysseus will reach scheria , and the
alas , and i have sung
during this stay in london , clare had had proofs that his poems
and vainly pierce the solemn gloom
to let you know that in his best opinion
heart against him . "
( for why her face wore sorrow 's livery , )
all the achaeans might admire her . she washed her face with the
for just half an hour by the queen 's best repeater .
who had made his little home
something at least , howe'er it 's called ,
the sun was dim , the air was chill ;
such interchanges might the stars and skies
victa prius nulli , nullo spectata triumpho
come from their haunts and hiding - places ; yea ,
vuelve á mí que te llamo y te deseo ;
heart , and set the great anvil on the stithy , and wrought
all else he deems the courier may recount ,
long been asking for a bearer . "
then thus apollo to the warrior god .
when earth 's last picture is painted , and the tubes are
( 14 ) so , too , herodotus , book ii . , 20 , who attributes the theory
no hand shall stay those dogs of hell
it may be driven away by smoke , especially by that from inula
startled by her quick reprisal , wrath is lost in blank
shifted and shone and fell ,
to righteous judgment , swift and dire ;
and how do you do again ?
high and higher and yet more high ,
the trumpets of the north will blow ,
and the thought of death close - walking the other side of me ,
so spake the false dissembler unperceivd ;
( perchance of shadow - shapes from shadow - shows ) ,
here a hundred men have labored ,
here 's his health in water
they wished their lot like her 's ;
who strives to please , my pleasure numbs ,
the first time ever caesar put it on ;
may do such work ?   but whosoe'er thou art
the bosom where his lips were pressed ,
" rudel to the lady of tripoli " : rudel symbolizes his love as the
when seed is sown wi ' care and toil ,
truth to a man of fifty 's always strange ;
this nature of mind , now ruler of our body ,
whose trees in summer yield him shade ,
he 's sworn thereby , the spanish sarazand ,
mercury , slayer of argus , to steal the body . all were of this
only i know as i wonder , karlene ,
grant to my weary flocks a cool retreat ,
i 'll build as they only dreamed .
the sun was sunk , and after him the star
which , if thou know the way , i covet not .
and welcome is the cry to him , though heard at dead of night ,
or slew the dun deer of his tyrant lords ,
" ' not without purpose once more to return ,
has stolen from thy proud , young years their sap ,
and johnny appleseed , priestly and free ,
the rapid line of motion , then at once
o ' the blue - gray branches swears a sudden flame ,
and a second into ehstland ,
one boat toiled noiselessly along the deep ,
for e'en and morn , she cries , alas !
and under the alders , that skirt its edge ,
“ for ȝef that water his kende lest
closed his eyes . "--lockhart 's life of scott , vii . , 394 .
with the rank and pay of a sapper !
your house is left unto you desolate ? " '
the lamb of god who taketh sins away ,
" bring me now , o blest and holy!--to the ganga , ocean 's bride ,
of rainbows and starry eyes .   the waters thus
you 'll be drown'd
shunning soft pity 's rising sway ,
haste then , from every error flee ;
λάβρος ‘ greedy . ’ dicte was a mountain of crete ; whence the word
to make their memories for ever live :
the world is waiting for the spring .
he really is coming -- oh my !
ach mehr und mehr i m abendhauch
close to those brother fountains , the huge crag
in roumanian wine - shops
not , as before he deem'd , deriv'd from crete ;
smoke - cloud . there were delawares and dacotahs and choctaws and
he waited long and wearily in vain,--
" marlowe is dead , " said nash ,
why , werter , dost thou leave me so ?
from combat with the elements . " _                    _ 30 _
fair were you in your nest .
earth 's real wealth is in the heart;--in truth ,
she rung her hands , and tore her hair ;
and thoughe the way be esy streyght and playne
in sudden distance from my sight were veil'd .
vagabond and unconfined !
listening the murmur of the shore
distant as far as separated is
" and we fear no dawning morrow ,
to wake thy dead devotion was my point ;
tilts bubbling notes at me .
that crouches over against us . cadiz holds
dislike a rantin ' highlandman .
thy kindling beauties with insatiate gaze ,
the high triangular door of the world . . .
an ’ welcum all nashuns fra north to th ’ saath ;
ask the fond nightingale ,
and thilke world which thei er this
they were love letters , they had been engaged ,
then how much more the mist of lime - dust fine !
far heard , lows not thine ear to charm ;
antonius , though originally spoken in no wider a forum than
a breath might quench .
and heavenward fly to sue for grace
learnings , honour the poet 's triumph .
and every silent grove in melody awoke .
i scent from earth more blood ! more blood !
to find the truth ; more difficult , more bent
a form to gaze on with delight ,
ere he made a final answer .
i sued to be a servant then ,
for now the storm of summer rain is o'er ,
as wind or slumber light . "
two pair of stockings , and one pair of shoes —
of a survival
qui des decrets du ciel est le premier auteur .
whom no mortal beholding will have breath ;
kind thought came thronging to his mind , and he turned to look at
yonge maegden allegader
all ye polar skies , reveal your
and pampá flushed with roseate glow ,
he comes to thee all unaware
i can give her love and honor , and i ask of you no dower ;
endow your soul with pinions;--
i fod yn hynod hynefydd _ gymro _ ,
with cruel facetiousness said , " curse the kiddy !
qui potis est ? inquis . quod amantem iniuria talis
there , as she pondered the clouds for the shadow of coming ills ,
so sang thy heart to thy heart , and so to the swinging sea
il y a bien longtemps qu'il apparut tout - a - coup dans la vielle
the fatness of a goodly land
we heead erect , and girt respect ,
the yellowhammer , often prest
se confunden y enlazan
there is no green nor gracious red to see .
she checked herself with a stifled exclamation .
in haste he 'd flown there
" how swiftly passed the evening ! " helen sighed .
her wooers -- light as all - embracing air
with such achievement as a strenuous will ,
give a shade
to hear how youthful siegfried so gloriously had sped ,
known in the valleys of arcady .
gang aft a - gley ,
there , above noise and danger ,
_ died , they set me , meaningless ,
' let the man that woos to win
so when they brought the holy grail ,
subjects for his pencil .
and he wags his head ;
on sunny noons upon the deck 's smooth face ;
salió con él razonando .
and then afar beyond the clouds to fly
' behold what wretches to the bed pretend
we saw the swift clouds fall ,
increasing store with loss , and loss with store ;
  willingly to accept his suffering , even when he exclaimed ,
well , in her robes of gauze in there .
for sure ' twere impious to despair ,
to idas , bravest warrior in his day
god send our mistress a good christmas - pie !
and softest silence broods o'er all the dale .
he lifts erect his glorious stature ,
and those who , like myself , more poorly fared ,
gaze at him with a spectral stare ,
and laughed as she 'd been mad :
kip in me ' and , on steeny isaac 's floor ,
or the moon ’ mongst the starlets above ,
from the oak - built , fiercely - burning pyre ,
of all their labour ; him with awful eye
but if you 've bartered friendship and the faith
the hangman 's hands were near .
" light down , light down , lady marg'ret , " he said ,
oh , hasten -- oh , let us not linger--
“ should’st guard thy tongue , child , guests before ,
of all god 's plagues and curses dread from stygian waters sent .
like an old servant , now cashiered , he lay ;
" o patroness of arms , unspotted maid ,
with many a weary step , and many a groan ,
" not as yet can i abandon
thence charged with riches , as increased in fame ,
to every house , and church .
thickets and a moat within ten yards of the house . "
by night perspire a poison draught ;
so it saves drink ; an ' then , besides , a feller could n't beg
thou canst , to what will come the citizens of the divided city ;
" yesterday at hour of twilight ,
she now,--but through the air on dragon wings
i gaze to the boundless sky .
and , looking past the roses , i see there
there where the sinner leaves off sinning ,
i do remember me , that in my youth ,
" and this is love , as wise men say . "
as from some peak
of many far wiser than we--
up the hill .
the curse of heaven their march pursues
growls from his deep breast , horror falls on all .
of my ditty the burden i pray thee to catch .
he 's put some one else in our pew--
more natural as well as more pleasant to think of these two
marko ’s noble falcon groans in suffering ,
her only work is propagation .
the star by which they rose .
the sceptered satraps of the king of kings ,
e'en phlegethon of tartarus , with rattling , stony roar :
the heart?--yes i wore it
ah ! how often beneath this oak , returning from labor ,
or in the moonlight 's lacement
dragged up out of the hold ,
say he gib his life , fo ' true ,
in mine , an easier pillow for my head ,
will you take us there some day ? "
from being chased like moses thru
the old dreams , the lost dreams
while robinson was ploughed .
from the clover field , the delicate spoil .
the flag - rope gibbers hoarse ,
to chase , himself , however resolute
bending among his books . thrice he assayed
like a light out of our heart ,
“ or to a place transform her , where my waves
fantasy them with starry brede .
the robins nestling to his old grey coat .
some circumstance that would betray
lifeless , but beautiful , he lay ,
oh , there you go again ,
might ask a whole day 's patience .
behold the blossom - bosomed day again ,
glitter their folds within :
lo here the first - fruits ! battle - spoil won from a haughty king :
i laugh when those who at the spear are bold
free of their lives , to guard my fame .
i raise my clothes above the knee .
the gleaming archway of the bridge of prayer .
while he triumphs , and while the trojans yield ,
but telemachus spake unto grey - eyed athene , holding his
stood a walnut - tree ; once more there
spontaneous rise , and blossom in the shade ;
i 'll solemnly make an immutable vow . "
sang to him in his wild way ,
the sun half sinks i ' the brimming , rosy brine :
that whilom were wo nt to stonde .
by my mistress having caught me fiercely ,
reception , at a time when literary curiosity was yet confined to
shall live their little lucid sober day
with uncouth bellowing , to elude the light .
against the thin remains of ruin'd troy !
she saw , she wept , she ran with eager pace ,
but i 'd better not crow till he 's out of the wood .
near her pale chariot shone a twinkling star ,
men on the statues , men on the tombs
ἀπόλλωνι καὶ ποταμοῖς οὶ νέοι ἀπέτεμον τὰς κόμας , διὰ τὸ αύξήσεως
the cloth of gold and the perrie
both the moravian and bohemian line ;
without any assistance from the contents of the bag the " livid
wherof his moder was riht glad ,
little feet hastening , so soft , unworn ,
and where my dream of what might be
but what thou tellest me now aids me so ,
in mind quite clear
bulks mystic , ghostly , thrid the gloom
for every clot , a burning spot
whipped by the storm , screaming and calling .
who did up her back hair every morning with a wreath of roses ,
of light 's excess , many lessons and counsels gave ,
of the great city , met thee on my way
by lust of gold to thy dim temples brought
" fairy - boat , stay ,
_ he leaves the bright hall where the aesars dwell . _
and strains divine from a violin
and he steered for the open sea .
almost exalted in my shame .
would i were with them -- i shall be so soon !
bright his armor gleamed ;
blame not the temple 's meanest part ,
a lofty fabric does the sight invade ,
with sword , and these were mighty ; the new knight
waiting for the jays and ravens .
beyond the limits of a vulgar fate ,
tells no stories , tells no stories ,
with a native mistrust of _ la belle phrase _ ; of _ " temps doré , "
or else to say ere he forsooke the field ,
her large eyes , wide and staring , took no heed
for women shed and use them at their liking ;
what men they be , and that so i may commune with my good
as cries of men or plash of streams .
" in vain i rule the paphian seas ,
xlvi . him turnus sees , and through the void afar
snickered , " she 's left her happy home for him . "
to darken the brow of the son of the sun !
will bathe thee in a stream
for more it is than i can well express :
bradamant for the court of charlemagne
already a wit and a little stoic--
hast thou learnt of the sea ?
too many little babes with bleeding hands
he snatch'd the lightnings , that at my last day
and gave me dreadful knocks .
whose fountain who shall tell ? before the sun ,
an oily tongue with fatal , cunning sense ,
are they not written in the boke of carr,[§1 ]
or think at least some one who miss'd you
will be hidden on thy breast .
than reach the faintest glory round him shed .
the nymph ( it seems ) was taken as she flew ,
with many a wofull compleignynge
had wally eaton well .
that day he wore a riding coat ,
just out of reach--
fast scho flekirs about his fete , and fleȝtirs aboute . ”
in robin 's mouth , and faded so .
nor ceased from his attempts until he stood
my mortal foe is much severer , -
a packet o ' brown senna
as story tells , have trod this wilderness :
nec dicti studiosus erat .
thy ruin'd sweets , and fancy weep no more . "
if i existed not for him , the knave ,
_ lucian , quomodo hist . scribenda . _
then , with my waking thoughts
to the flourishing isle of the brave and the free ,
of the child 's friendship had no further care .
e'en though , while now at rest he calmly sleeps ,
had three and four times been reiterated ,
and panting nights : your service of bought doves
but if thou still must sing ,
at the first alarm she is off and away .
whenever men to nobler aims aspire ,
a short eclipse from his portentous shade ?
ya - honk he says , and sounds it down to me like an invitation ,
thou wert not churlish in thy palmier year
returnd on that bright beam , whose point now raisd
henceforth with her that holy gift and guide ,
on shields and helmets light .
our goodly domain and the temples of god :
with all her ties .
abounding , but so fashioned that , in all
the nine - pillared cromlech , the bride - streams ,
i skirt sierras , my palms cover continents ,
and flew to spain . "--"oh tarry not : away ; "
soldiers to die , and pie ?
the bands on foot , and reymond them beforn ,
restlessness which drove him from place to place , his patriotic
no doubt it has a sort of prosperous sound ,
flew his kite ,
yes , higginbottom did aspire
among arabian sands :
with spoils and honour , when the war is done .
to one small sect , and all are damned beside .
with prospects of plenty surrounded !
o doubt accurst !
now quit yourselves with valor , / for evil is our pass ,
strike hard and fear not as thou would'st be free ;
ah ! these are memories of a better day
ever smiling beside his faithful oar ,
she mew'd to every watery god
it would ne'er stay away
the will to see with it .   if you did so ,
the sword and golden circlet were achieved .
in shadow , waiting for them , caitiffs all ;
death 's purple triumph ; on the blushing ground
lord of all .   but he heeded not my sacrifice , and only thought
who , repossest of all his kingdom , reigns .
they heard with joy and gladness that home they would be sent .
roar . everything was enveloped in spray ; there were no harbours
the tailor 's needle may be keen ,
loud and louder still the storm
kisses that but made them bleed ,
your sire may keep you , while your mother holds you too .
oh my , ai n't it a shyme !
is set me back a little more behind .
out - deprecates her deprecating strain . )
farewell , o brother , sister , sire !
and all , of other butterflies , as vain !
discernment of me , or if absence long
so let , etc .
is to laugh at the boy , and he will cry .
and so be done with it .   this many a year ,
nor goblins nor spectres on earth have a station,--
with a joke ;
oh ! who the music of the groves , the music of the heart ,
to hope it were thanne anon
firstly , begin with the beginning ( though
that bathed with splendour thy majestic noon:--
we sent him to high school ,
ere i come again to see you .
' tis the drifting light of the moon .
i freedom 's value know :
of light or of gloom ;
ah ! how they made them bound at the first stripe !
two roads branch towards her cottage here ;
from every point of heaven the hurrying cars
( my eye and betty ! what weak mortals we are ;
i , by the roots unwonted of this wood ,
his neck ; at length , as , wretched wife , she cry'd,--
when for pride the pair of you proved the floods ,
when the heart kept time to the carol of birds ,
simon had a son ; with shot of a gun ,
i pray thee to deny me all i ask
thro ' green calabria 's copses ,
reasoning , it will then remain for us to elevate the thesis from
that comes the oftenest , darling !   in my dreams ,
nor torrid summer 's sickly smile ;
at least we think so , though but few have guess'd
god help them if they weep such tears
since he left to hunt the death - swan . "
from the joys that lead astray ,
finest of her silken wardrobe ,
and now one after one seeks its lodging , as star follows star
in the keys , and the silver frets ;
she -- style no more a man that martial dame --
leads thee , or where most needs , whether to wind
the restless sleeper turns : " how dark , how late !
even now the tradesmen from their tills ,
support , and whom the forest shields ;
hobhouse muttering fearful curses ,
then upon the trees repose not ,
ye may commence a shaver ;
from the girls who shook them down .
no , you ai n't by yo'self in dat .
depths of mysterious gloom without that rolled
" but since the man that runs away
and yet it were a greater grief
the morning wore on and i did not come near you .
rode out to blackman 's run ,
the hills were very high
the sportsman 's joy , the murd'ring cry ,
the amorous thrush concludes his sang ;
fu ' blythe that night .
or else betrayed him ere they ran ?   ah no !
their hearts throbbed out in an alpine lay ,
with caverned twilight and dull altar smoke
the libbard , and the tiger , as the mole
come warm thee with this cup of ale . "
and they who fall to - day the same to us
ingenious , binding with a golden verge
fell suddenly and soon .
so she who doth imparadise my soul ,
nor does it cease the heart t ' alarm ,
there rose up from the sea ,
didn ' have no teeth fer to eat corn cake ,
for twa pairts deid , an ' ane alive ,
the very brothel - door was barred
that first was stirr'd with thee ?
" he is very nice reading in summer , but _ inter _
winter and night as they teach us ?
had sowne of old these doubts in his deepe brest .
  william , fifth lord digby , was 74 when this fourth epistle was
he has to ask his landlord 's leave before he lifts his arm ;
but theirs are tufted banks , theirs umbrage , theirs
for your branches murmur love songs to the sun-
into the choral joy that sounds
some that she but held off to draw him on ;
als ferforth as the herte lay ,
the strength that binds the stars , and reins the sea ,
" this carol they began that hour
you are all that is lovely and light ,
and scarce insure the wretched power to fly .
philip 's true heart , which hunger'd for her peace
come , we 'll abroad ; and let 's obey
with a plunge and a roar
when the bright lamp is carried in ,
holds his ground , for god will save .
with horns and hooves
the " episode of sarpedon " is now incorporated in the complete
the music of her bangles passed the porch--
were either this or that .
" and where's -- where 's mr . torpenhow ? " she inquired at last .
to wander by that soothing light .
yet do i sometimes feel a languishment
but had gone on for years and years !
mass thou the might of joseph , yet to join
the peer , who sees that mischief they intend ,
wisdom and courage strongly to withstand
but your taproot drinks of the sacred springs
thee , shepherd , thee the woods and desert caves
dying to save us from eternal death !
" heigho ! " yawned one day king francis ,
" they wunt hev to larn agin ,
did i not watch him while he let
not in entire forgetfulness ,
no puede soñar su alma
drive the mob away with whipping ,
whence came the ember
mihi quod credideris , sumes ubi posiueris.--trinum . 145 .
nay , i had taken up those arms divine
when back from their taking and keeping
' tis now no kettle , but a bell .
tam turpes tenebras haec non dignatur , at ipsum
and hold them fast for ever there .
will martial flames for ever fire thy mind ,
and each performed his part assigned :
breathless as when a father dies .
yet never more than gravely glad ;
oh , then the smile is warmed away ,
from that sad hour . late when the tempest rocked ,
they watch ' i m with ' is comrades , they watch ' i m with ' is beer ;
thou seest how not i alone but all
he 'd bid you give it a new turn of face ,
but clear day quelleth
i am but a shape that stands here ,
and trod his holy ground with reverent awe .
into the thorn tree
now whirling one , a shot well aimed unto the hero sped :
hast lost youth 's rosy cheek and lineless brow .
savor of diddle and hey - de - dee .
with costly gems , in witness and in sign
or is it the cheery magnum?--nay , i 'll not chide the cup
a color she knew in her dreamful heart
of all things made , and judgest onely right .
and form one single nature of themselves ;
ther - w{i}t{h } he gard hyme dweaesaes .
on thy faire mother , o immortall boy ,
where mountains kiss their hands to either sea ,
" seeing each life given is a leaf
called for her late ( the horse had broke a trace ) ,
with breath of the magnolia - tree ,
although i could not pay , my meal ;
lost , wretched man , who trusts you to his scathe !
clasping his withered hands , he said ,
expelled . " they answer:--"sire , you speak the truth . "
i have made use of my nose for years together to smell with ;
that back from rhine so hearty had come her own good knight .
( will no kind power the helpless stripling shield ! )
and sacrifice with generous piety ?
and a horde of dark colourless heads and straining backs ;
no trace remain where once the glory grew .
but oh , it happens , i too truly know ,
and the deuce knows what we may do --
the gates , at which she enter'd , and did light
and , having raised me well upon his breast ,
and never envy blot their name !
the argives storm - dispersed went sailing on .
once charm'd the world ; and here 's the uscan swan
heard the tales about this white doe .
seven times one.--exultation
before it wholly dies away ,
diffused over it , and the notes in which it had been explained .
deep hid the shining mischief under ground :
recurring epithets of homer , if rendered into verse , delay
from a mechanic , and bless
no cloud to colour it , no breeze to line :
of his riches and his glory ,
no salutation kind on either part
he lived in mirth and honor with his kin and men around .
what then shall wretched sinners do ,
have we outraged you that we now are cursed
thro ' flames unsing'd we march , and tread the kindled coals
a portion of god 's word , and offer prayer .
wi ' pith this day .
the reason deeper lies , --
from the circumstance of general robert napper [ napier or
what and how great is the virtue to live on a little ( this is no
close by its home , and dogs are barking there ;
alþer - swettest , sweetest of all , b. 699 .
and , hard till then and selfish , i
as makes them entranced lie
such a dread vade retro was written in light
her brows like bended bows do stand ,
preferable to my old solitude till now . . . . and now i begin
with another hence has gone .
that you have never learned to talk , my friend !
love will find out the way .
thus dread the issue : but with fear repressed ,
and butchered , frantic gestures of the dead .
camaraderie beside the lake ... fellow for fellow ,
nomauilia , x , 4 . to do a thing personally .
and i lifted a rock and i ' it ' i m   one ,
the third , and the generation of the second person in the
one voice has heralded the word ,
if the marsh - gendered fog conceal it not . '
from doing damage there . '
alas ! my only client 's dead .
a sad memorial , and subjoin his own;--
he turned him to his evening prayer ,
" have n't heard anything about the elopement ? "
feruere cum uideas belli simulacra cientis ,
and tell it forth that all may know ? ”
massaged his lamps with fragrant drug store dope
her self more safe then humane<33.19 > kind .
tall southern pines , i wrong you in my sorrow .
and played a thousand merry pranks
so of these isles , these mountains , and this sea ,
finds within a ball of scarlet ;
sweet the tinkling rill to hear ;
guild lay under his engine , dead .
hence , should one order disproportion'd grow ,
that yet one peak in all the skyey throng
and mony childrene fatherless ,
at edinburgh , scotland , george e. bissell , sculptor ]
but fair and well she crept in by the clerk ,
extol the strength of a twice - conquer'd race ;
of the other flank , the sword appears in sight ;
the time for this achievement hasteneth fast :
fond ! were it not in hope of thy reply :
" he will come to - night ! " said she .
souls loathsome , foul , and black with daily sin ,
the sea - gulls restless gleam and glance .
and all the lands both far and near ,
( i ween he wasna thin ) ,
when she has her blanket on .
unconscious in my heart all time
if the dire speed of spear that cleaves the bones
barley - bree , whisky .
when the mines shuts down an ' they 're turned away ! )
while pleasure was not lessened in the least .
and hectic autumn came and brought its charm
just like a love - sick boy !
and a willow - branch that is broken .
" love seeketh only self to please ,
and ' twas ' ard if they 'd be wasted like , and all along o ' me .
i own in disarray :
( as dolon pass’d , ) behind a heap of dead :
else how could the dead things be
that i may at the pictures look ,
thanks to the human heart by which we live ,
such notes as orpheus ' self might lean to hear ,
to behold the knight ,
which boasts her lineage from celestial fire .
a harried man i think i be !
did she forget , or not believe ,
for fragrant treasures long forgotten there ;
gazed with wonder at a mountain
canto vii . fridthjof 's happiness
he should have thought would feel it when his mate
with bending sterns and bending bows .
from may - time and the cheerful dawn ;
salt as the under - main--
and who shall whistle round the place
overlook a space of flowers ,
and still be worthy of the love that was .
which against charles made thee so proudly swell .
still round her the scene all in loneliness shone ;
i thought my lover had gone , else darkness and he are one ,
holly standeth in ye house
ther gangs na ' ane , but twa .
his front , brows , eyes , one undistinguish’d wound :
fir'd by their country 's wrongs , to arms they fly ,
though he lived a roue , yet he died a philosopher . "
the fun that from such gatherings ensues ;
love no longer can hold sway
oxen,--weary ; man,--hungry : the sun , already high ;
for as he lifted up his eyes to swear
feather - bed piled above , which either stifles you in summer , or
" thou takest no rest , gunesh chund , " exclaimed his mother ,
and she 'd " like to know where you learnt manners . "   oh yes !   kick
stranger ! my first enquiry shall be this--
the dog dragged his legs , pained to stir ,
now came i where the water 's din was heard ,
adowne the lee , that to them murmurde low ,
und seine bank steht vor der hütte leer .
as in his life , this man , in death , is ours ;
i now am at thy mercy quite .
going home -- i shed a few tears ,
and even to god may violence extend
and pushing , and pressing , and flapping ,
" when you go to wash the dishes ,
floating downward , very clear , still the echoes reach the ear
balder their joy , so bright , so loved a god .
not to the righteous , perfect grace :
the gizzard got into its place ,
" my dear young brother here might we d. "
among green leaves and tulip - tinted fruit ,
of the lost world of goodness and virtue .   like one
we 'd planned a great home - comin ' .
garrs , henry de : sketch of , 200 ;
she loves me best , whene'er i sing
not i , sweet soul , not i.
behold him seated on a mount serene ,
full on the gem the iron drives its course ,
" _ no smallest thing that thou hast done
with his fore - finger on his brow ;
how shall i face our lord the king ,
more loveliness than old seraglios
with life - force quickened .
in tones soft and pensive it visits my ear,--
a gathering , or a play ;
says--"if ye will be my leman sae true ,
like dew - drops on a rose ,
but his legs were rested , his heart was good ,
can pierce an armed man .
and make proud flemings bend their knee ,
under their mother 's charge . then alcinous led the way to the
and tatter the shrouds of sable silence
good - night!--here 's the end of my paper ;
that burns thine upward path through joy and pain ,
reaping allusions private and inglorious ,
until death at last shall claim him , if he does n't do his part .
each swore by his book ,
to you i sing , in simple scottish lays ,
and of the years when i denied him -- so
who bade you arise from your darkness ? i
did paean 's inspiration seize the frame
all notoriety he 'd shirk ,
the eternal nymphs who paint the heaven through all its depths , i
we 'll bid that hither heralds / unto our land shall fare ,
for the old folk ever find it hard to see
the deil he could na scaith thee ,
her legions traversed north and south and east ,
she looks across the gulf but hears no voice ,
once i thought to die for love ,
canto lii . the crossing of gangá .
lived forever with his mother ,
and mixed with the song of the whirling stars ,
the door as sudden shut , and i ,
two mighty hosts a leaguer’d town embrace ,
proclaim that all around are free ,
with them in fame and honours high .
short while did beatrice endure me thus ;
and love might play before ,
laid the soft babe in his hard - mailèd hands ,
still flows in torrents -- let that blood suffice !
i moved , and could not feel my limbs :
the dog his growl at gawaine 's whisper ceased ,
" love is leche of lyf and nexte oure lorde selve ,
when at three strokes she had unhorsed them all ,
he shall the debt of nature pay :
kind souls , you wonder why , love you ,
sideways fell into the river ,
to the worn , familiar door .
nor even in fancy to recall
to polish , furnish , and delight the mind .
i see everything in the glass,--
of nothing glad nor noble in my verse
he gave up the sword to the treacherous boer .
believes itself between the monster 's fangs ,
who we d through love we d mostly so .
i make a sudden sally ,
let no justice gon aside ,
innumerable of stains and splendid dyes ,
whether he die in the light o ' day or under the peak - faced moon ;
_ greater than the measure of the heroes of renown ,
thou coudst not climb upon the hanging rocks ,
( what music , certes , can you find
lo ! the sun upsprings behind ,
or die a cadger pownie 's death ,
and the other , who so stalwart seems , is cassius .
they formed a seething river ,
to sandy pylus , and shall hasten thence
as thin as a lath , if not thinner ;
but you must take my old broadsword ,
i remember but to love her
and on her breast there lay a ruby red .
employs himself most usefully ,
anon as thogh thei wolden fare :
she wrote of mercy :   ' she was loth
and drink it in the hollow of thy hand ?
" i 'll land you anywhere you want to go -
all these are maritime , and on the shore
the street lamps and the houses .
rayed their swift - searching magic forth ; and then
beyond the little smokes and stirs of men .
from these alone , all _ modes _ , all orders spring
and she sought talismans , and turned in vain
so suddenly sweet a story so soon told .
now larrie , for shame ! to be bribin ' a pig
what pow'r , o man ! thy reason then restores ,
how much it delights him to see the french rally ,
for in thy mother 's nature i find such an one as mine own is ,
semper digneris si meminisse mei .
when first young maro sung of kings and wars ,
' much like the rest i think , but rather fresher .
despise my puny strength , and shame
" i was beloved of thee . "
i love so much their style and tone--
the poet and his " guide " agreed in repudiating christianity . they
now tilly 's at the gate .
keeps a watch on all the world ,
we glory in daring that dies or prevails ;
when eagles flit then their nests are plunder .
and leaves of frozen sails
and there is always broddy :
fill up the intermediate space .
o'erlighted at the gate .
and in the reverent silence , slow
" where a daisy grows ,
never while waves
when yet his talents with his graces grew ;
a viewless chain of being circling all ,
the song of godlike heroes yet to rise ;
signs of god 's controversy with new england .
woven by the sun 's fair daughter ,
o ' naething but a simple smack ,
had come young porphyro , with heart on fire
that each , if hector of the glancing helm
aino , thy beloved daughter ,
on the dark norway pine ,
kāna came nigh and sat beside me ,
roȝ rakkes þer ros with rudnyng an - vnder
with passions wild and strong ;
that where all things are cruel i had slain
given last to him who loved her first , nor swerved
the dew - drop is bright with a star ;
the day drags through though storms keep out the sun;[hq ]
because , although in act and word
bot now it is befalle so ,
hung with the yellow - belled laburnum , stands
by heavenly severance from all shadow of mirth
and with the farmer he 'll be very nice ;
" i have been wondering frequently of late
on this our haunch of earth , as round she roars
out o ' the cold an ' the rain .
beside his flocks upon the plain .
from thee , o angel of the lord .
discovering both her breasts .
  originally , " ambition , avarice , and th ' imperious " etc . , for
" _ for long with horror she has viewed
the two strong mules bare the princess to the town . and
his will it was that placed her there !
which when her lovely laughter shows ,
and first atharva texts be read . ”
we have named it of old by name ,
both day and night : how often from the steep
ask me for my house and grounds ;
portrait as wholly ironical ; and bolton corney , without much
has england with an ireland one !
and of its opposite .   he next , who follows
by the tangled hedge of cherry .
with notes by the
i think it better that in times like these
and then the mouldered ditch and ramp
the little old poem that nobody reads
never afeard are we " ;
_ great _ odes of which the language can boast . "
and prostitutes itself to a spasm that relieves .
heaven drove me off my course as i was leaving sicania , and i
that very caesar , born in scipio 's days ,
" under is her own dear face ! "
if lords and commons could at last agree ;
the knight thus utter'd his command .
show clearly to this royal youth
my soul said in me : this is marvelous ,
the blessed nude at eve leaned out
the bard unbars the cage ;
+ liberty.+ let me heare what ye do say
in all but its sweet looks and mien divine .
some of these i may remember ;
what he demands with such solicitude . "
sang the bluebird , the owaissa ,
since thence
of the vast multitude , whom various wounds
sheathes the sword and blunts the spear ,
and yet , each effort of the human soul ,
a ' the lads o ' thorniebank ,
ere the winter come as king ,
is just so many stages less than god ,
her tears fell ere the dews were dried ;
vittle , victual , grain , food .
fain would she match in toil the anchoret .
some vent in a homminibus , some vent in a cabby ,
intermingled flow ;
perchance my heart may pardon you this deed :
the ston was worth al other thing .
remembering sunlight on the steepled square ,
his fellow - warriors bold ; them follow'd all
so saying , the king took a stone ,
and now at distance can discern
darts the accursed javelin
and prayed her quaff ; then bathed her brow , a task
hail glorious chief ! where never chief before
resonant as the twang of a harp , now seemed of itself
whither resorting from the vernal heat
beforehand i absolve thee , but declare
money , i despise it ,
are books , that should divide your cares--
prolonged effort ; when , the labor which has become a habit having
me reccheth noght who overthrowe ,
" the empire that declines to fall . "
then set at large upon the lonely road ,
by the securest and the freest track .
and some blam'd the baby -- and some blam'd the clock--
he read aloud the book wherein the master
in the midnight and the snow ,
and every turf the fierce foot clings to bleeds .
he spoke :   the mother smiled , but half in tears ,
more to secure them in their naval cells ,
that he might worke the avengement for this shame
the victor daemon mounts obscure in air ,
till after three days more ,
all my hopes and fears ,
she went , but by two maidens of her train
and last , presenting to her eye
few pence in purse had i ,
silent we went an hour together ,
gloomily napping ,
love , sweetness , goodness , in her person shin'd
' o wae betide my ill mither ,
adorn the thunderer 's temple , nor upraise
are here discreetly blent ;
with quivering up - clutched hands , deadly and white ,
up to the middle region of thick air ,
as she reached the sandy margin ,
this seraph - band , each waved his hand ,
daily worshipped at her altars , nightly bent the reverent knee--
" thus he spoke , and the achaeans feared no more . the daughters
nor in death is loss . "
a poor little lad was aladdin !
here the noble cause of learning
in the dedication , for which he received ten guineas , there is
where stand the burghers . but on drawing near
the child 's was like the holy one 's
its present epithet . ]
straight did the royal provosts / give everywhere decree
great nature 's master - appetite destroy'd !
but what art thou , who deedless look’st around ,
but he did n't say nothin' ,
but meet the old sins , all unshriven ,
for i 've wagered a crown with beelzebub ,
you still evade me .
sublucet uvæ purpura .
alone might hazard our relief ,
o rivers , forests , hills , and plains !
anything to correct , please send them by return of the carrier .
once the fair and lovely aino ,
an article , vulgarly written , which deals
says : _ on this spot once confucius stood and
some bearded meteor,{11 } trailing light ,
reddat an oscula quae dabantur ,
come , and bring with thee thy late - chosen love ;
his hors was good , but he ne was nought gay .
onerous to satiate souls , increased their buoyance .
but he still had time to get fit to run ;
yours but false love within ?
the rich fat . and some pieces he cast into the fire after
further than might a cross - bow 's arrow speed
a globe of circular light ,
the grace of forest charms decay'd ,
there 's such dew on the earth and such lights in the heaven ,
and in my hand and bosom hold
low - lidded twilight , o'er the valley 's brim ,
which lure the eye but mock the heart .
find the videhan lady there ,
that sings of sweet francesca 's grace :
" each gale comes fraught with sounds of woe :
from the orc , and drag the monstrous fish to ground ,
hath vexed the red - sea coast , whose waves o'erthrew
or that , and say , " my face is turned to you " ;
therefore the lord he was severe ,
and philip answer'd ` i will bide my year . '
then vulcan his tremendous fires repress'd ,
" surly , burly burgomaster ,
so i behold these books upon their shelf ,
in seeking out the powerful , the great ,
and leaned down to him , and my fingers gave
with weed and thistle overgrown -
and so with kindly aspect beckoned in
ne , pia , ne nimium , virgo , permitte querelis :
and so my patent back again is swerving .
thitherward were orlando she had spied ,
while our feet struck glories
d'amor son tug miei cossir .... "
strong is the flood and furious , the stream can ill be cross'd .
let the cup escape from thy hand ; [ do this ] before the
from virginia 's hills and waters ;
when life struck hands with love ?
keeps the dead berries of a former spring .
as ' twere the ecstatic language of their feet .
_ two - stress anapestic . _
my horse he can ride ,
their separate distinctions variously
sang , with many a change ,
like a fast - falling star , from unknown to unknown
facing the pump , and near the granby 's head ;
whose wisdom and experience are of worth
gloats with delight upon the glazing eye ,
into the bowl the kernels drop .
and so god made the marvellous birds
a wanderer in a solitary way ,
thou be not apt to credit what i tell ,
around you in memory rise !
heeded not her mother 's counsel .
with ease distinguishable from them all ;
bounds the hare in frosted fur - robe ,
once loved a little geisha girl ,
what , then , remains for wretched man ?
of evil intent , but that i must rehearse
and it was sharper than diamond stone ,
nor again ever cause her such distress .
on the distant rim
so fair to be seen .
the first to welcome , foremost to defend ,
i meet her on the dusty street ,
where now i venture , leading to the bourn
which speak :
_ three _ . larst night a little star
the rose 's treasured sweets ,
he would that warrior as a god adore .
himself unseen , all - seeing , such power was in his shroud !
where january brings few faces . "
then heavily , as weighed by tears , each haunted moment goes ,
then the aged väinämöinen ,
the sons of sires who conquered there ,
" left till he return , alone
--dijo un soldado al pie de una ventana,--
you must accept its thorns , which bring to mind
  an appellation of diana , and hence of the moon .
would dread my club and mountain size ,
sche seide , at entre of the pas
as you sit so , in the firelight , your hand is the color of
thy silence and the fairness of thy face
alone -- through all eternity -- alone .
vidyunmáli , 364 note .
their course , in even balance down they light
drops for thee the nightly tear
the murmuring rivulets for ever flow .
_ faust _ . had i seven hours , to call my own ,
that sets you spinning through your pretty teens .
before the father and the conquering son
and roasts and stews -- and stumick - aches
the cryer from the minaret
thou comest not when violets lean
to prate , idomeneus ? thou seest the mares ,
to base occasion ; nor , in dread
the eager pleading of her glance with one
" my mother used to tell me of
for i sing of the naiads who dwell ' mid the stems
then draw we nearer day by day , 26 .
not where judea weeps beneath her palm ,
countless warriors from pohya ,
or one short sigh of humane breath , up - borne
his comrade , " a love - pageant ! for the man
the startled river turns leaden and harsh .
by a true fall indeed , i make
" i had , when very young , read the poetry of freneau , and as we
and from this he made the harp - screws ,
a harvest of barren regrets .   and the worm
why shouldst thou mourn ? in the empyreal clime
and wayward paths o’erflecked with shimmering shades ,
black piers with crust of dripping green ,
their dreams of birds and spring .
they turned , they talked within that grate .
let 's toddle home again , for we have gone astray ;
" our cells we fill , and at the fall "
solemnly iagoo added :
but there comes a night when the best gets tight ,
hou anthenor in grece ferde .
and his neck and his breast and his arms
lost all the others she lets us devote ;
prisoned in the walls of time
and fortune 's power drove hitherward . this home
petrarch 's death at arqua in july 1374 to have closely followed
this soul may see thy face , o lord of death !
what time your native mountains rang
fruges , tamen ipsae suapte natura enitent .
we met about two years ago .
speaks , in the pauses of the cannon 's roar ,
todos siguen con gran bulla
regard so kind for europe 's weal ,
but the whim stands still , and the wheeling swallow
and with bloom the orchard trees .
she came to sin with him after this manner ,
that lightnings shook and thunder .
lamps gracefully disposed , and of all hues ,
language is spoken . '
there is a shame of nobleness
the sun waiting , with smiles ,
drawn up in arms , the rest attend my call . "
( 4 ) the _ arte mayor _ line has already been described ( p.
oh i must pass nothing by
when nothing that asks for bliss ,
oft in his pity o'er his children weak ,
so it can jolly mame and make a kill ,
oh , randal 's hair was coal - black when he gaed awa'--
ring out the stains of sin .
of golf be dried -- and life grow all too brief
see ! i set free the fire within you--
whose golden leaves the teeming soil o'ershade ;
in me , as in his refuge -- he hath won
god knows -- not i -- why , when i 'd fain
one day as i unwarily did gaze
on one of them ; whereon i called in haste :
at inmost heart well pleased with one another ,
with the scent of prayer their lips are sweet ,
to battle with the storm that mars
lank oxen , rough as indian dogs ,
the fish below swam to and fro ,
should dare to cast a stone .
while her neat hand the milk pail strains ,
the lord of day shakes upon his central seat and turns up his
from the smooth cheeks , the rest , not backward dragg'd ,
why walk we thus alone , when by our side ,
while the poore satire cried stay maide so faire .
that they should go unto a house that stood
then find in it thy own delight ,
  suetonius [ lib . i. cap . xlv . ] informs us that julius cæsar was
that sang a - milking , so it seemed ,
it matters not whether he blame or commend ,
gray driftwood swishes along the sand ,
i keep this time , even before the flowers ,
and to hir chambre jason ledde ,
i think upon the stormy wave ,
for wisest , who esteems it least : whose thoughts
in order due they landed on the beach ,
high upon the gallows - tree
over the clover , over the grass !
an ' how he star'd and stammer'd ,
sing mournfully , oh ! mournfully ,
to see the wound thou gav'st a wound shall be .
here a blank ensued
the price though now not realized , must soon be strictly paid .
at your request we 'll reef the sail ,
you listen to my ophicleide !
even but this night , nae farther gane ,
as the fleecy snow
the hut where the beach - wave sleeps .
of the great bellincione since hath taken .
it ceased ; the king takes up the strain ;
and greyer .
who smiled at him across their gleaming rims ,
expectans donec tu rediisse queas :
i killed cock robin . "
' not good day , trooper campbell ,
' tis covered o'er with vile drift wood ,
little lady icicle is dreaming in the north - land
gay glides the dance , soft music fills the hall :
he dashes , where thickest rolled the cloud of smoke ,
he saw the squirrel scampering at his will;--
and both the horns of fate 's dilemma wound ;
sollicitant illi te circum , tantale , cena
and what their climate , where the sinking day
let not deceit claim sanction from above ;
to jupiter their pray'rs address'd ;
meme taya wewe , cimpungelu .
breathe o'er the years and the snow .
to call to mind his former cheats ,
brightened the depths of political philosophy with such vivid and
and let her form be what you will ,
why , e’en the dust they ’ve caught since he began
they say that in his prime ,
they steal my better self away
and jill came tumbling after .
and i know , one night , on some far height ,
who can dance , he 's so clever , and stand and on his head ,
and various forms assume at need ,
weeds in the turf over which we have passed open
a virgin 's loss aroused the teuton strife ;
few leagues removed , we wish our peaceful seat ,
muttering betwixt their lips some mystic thing ,
where'er he went to crack a bottle .
the groaning anvil scourge .
through the mist of a drunken dream they brought her
or armèd strength : his pure and mighty heart .
o tell a wretch in exile doom'd to stray ,
guess'd the far realm , not won by charon 's oar
" but the others will not know me ,
regardless of thy glorious clime ,
gay and audacious crime glints in his eyes ,
felt the girdle loosened , seen the tresses fly .
they drove their strong - back'd sumpters merrily o'er the lea .
but little it avail'd : terror outstripp'd
or tityus ' help or typhon 's .   here is one
and left the night to her silent reign .
" the hoard of king nibelung / entire did they bear
his eyes around , for hector only burn’d ;
as well might smooth a harder life .
sphere on heavenly sphere attending ,
whether kils most the amazon 's sword or lookes .
making arrangements for their bright vacation ,
to match them both together from her wombe ,
i know not but i know that all returns
“ burn'st with a new - felt heat ! thou , whose wide view ,
----they fain would -- if they might--
so did moche the litulle page ,
under chestnut and thorn
_ lucy _ [ _ apart ; the squire regarding her attentively _ ] .
who will delve ;
to wrath so moved were the knights and lords .
a clene maide and a virgine ,
and there i will keep you for ever ,
as ' tis our right to seize the chance
which brightens , with salvation 's sun ,
his arm was stretched , his bow was bent ,
nor yet our talk by journeying .   still we spake ,
to know what beats in mine ,
and we knew it was neither ghoul nor djinn :
wherof that love his herte assaie
and to a cow - plat away flies she .
his answer -- in a certain sense -- is true .
" what do you make so fair and bright ? "
and virgins naked were by lovers viewed ;
to whelm some city under waves of fire ;
a glory in the sky ;
no chance save what she earned herself ? what girl
four sign , the rest refuse : what then ?
where wealth and splendor dwell :
and douglas hath himself and cause
nursed his vengeance on the barretts of tirawley .
thou , if thou liv'st , i trust , shalt set us free ,
how long will lack of success in thy enterprises grieve
and too resolved to make my loss a gain
for ever climbing , yet for ever down :
by hearths accurst where love abode ;
and then , dissolving , trickles through itself
which sweetly solace men 's uneasy minds .
even such a wave , but not so pleasurable ,
wainamoinen 's harp - songs
that love the sun 's warm rays ,
he is coming , he is coming
to those babes that whined for love and pity ,
semial -- he the devil 's minister--
with an unwonted light .
each horseman drew his battle - blade ,
soon shall the sky be ours .
as in your urns the bones are laid ,
urere , quae tantum sustinuere nefas .
discover facts which any brain that 's common never finds ) ,
and " i 'm damned if i see it , " he said .
stay his return perhaps over this gulf
i dreamt that they were fill'd with dew
seventh pit : fraudulent thieves.--vanni fucci.--prophecy of
and change into a garden of the lord !
far deeper , sweeter -- what have i said ?   my brain
hands that shall never clasp thy hand .
to shield them from the storm ;
byggvir kvath :
no hint of green ; but to my listening heart
stiff with pride and gravity
in having wives on either arm ,
who thinketh not ,
confounding in itself two governments ,
no longer love me ; i 've offended them .
upon the sward , before the rest .
mamma comes home : there conrad stands ,
when i found you pure .
a stonie coldnesse hath benumbd the sence
than songs of bitterness and pain ?
and took , but read not the receipt :
for thee to look upon ;
but when he droop'd , and when he fell ,
and rusty , old and rusty , prince geraint ,
be others farre exceeding these in light ,
office , and ere long my name was called .
show their full length in graves , or oft indeed
the sun lifts _ all _ that is living , growing ,
then with his foot st . joseph rocked
both god 's and mary 's son .
( except that it perceives more subtle films )
along the field as we came by
rare and peculiar strain , as in mr . binyon 's " testamentum amoris "
of time through life 's dominions ,
hardly by prayer or tears ,
for dead folk by this crescent town .
no nobler captain ever trod
for our humanities ,
william somervil[l]e .
through sunny meadows , that outskirt the side
halo , fair as the bow - shot at his rise ,
then laughed the poisoner : " he ! he ! he !
and the mild swan - mother , grave with household cares ,
the successor of peter , and the name
as soon as he saw our daughter dell ,
such word alone were fit for only thee ,
sold stars and all space for a thing he could hold
die nacht herab mit langen flöhren .
by scottish shepherd haply framed of old ,
seen sech ! "
are beetling rocks , and against them the great wave roars
in the land of the dakotas !
four circles with the threefold cross , in best
the city of our god ?
if about me he happen to ask .
still be my ally !
i shall behold his course from where the blessed are . "
there was no insect sound to chirr ;
oh , let mankind discover never
to nazareth , where gabriel op'd his wings .
i do not question thee in idle play ;
rich capitals , as corner stones , or seats--
how will her dove - cote hold them ?
you imprudent old person of slough . "
did lighten on me , that whatever bait
but the dear marie i left behin '
of some vast charm concluded in that star
' all the region is denuded
where are you ? "
of flow'ry fields and turnip lands .
yet these , maybe , were happy in their lot .
any large extent , the state of knowledge respecting this elegant
that to those kickshawes ' longs more dainty meate .
in your loved craft curtailed your rest -
but those who labor for their daily bread
he seemed as if against me he were coming
and he that will this health deny ,
thy leave to work a little , live , and sing ;
while one discloses to his friend , apart ,
thou , death - doomed like the fly that sips
tap - room turned the worthy anton
and putt right back :
curled through the air across the ripening oats ,
which other husbands , i have learned , think bad .
sae the true rabbie far has gane
a purple flower sprang up , checquered with white ,
shall they sink in death 's terrors nocturnal ,
you will find that our voters have chosen your friends .
seen you gay ;
then all the suitors on each other cast
( i saw her smile ! ) oh , no , i did n't ,
patriotic songs which are sung by the multitude , while the
ships in the time of my anger , and you were all complaining of
he , who before had question'd , thus resum'd :
and i can not carry this battle :
while the harsh prude indemnifies her virtue
and palinurus ' name for aye the place shall bear . "
to see what mortal guest
live for ever and aye ,
above this tress , and this i touch ,
parce cadis tibi destinatis .
an eye upon the sea . till as i came
his vital spirit quench'd ; and on the ground
go from this spot to the city , and there present to the soldiers
but ' tis certain that no poems are politer ,
smit with the mighty pleasure to be seen :
and the promethean clay by thief endued ,
with bleeding cheek and drooping eye ,
thus rávaṇ his commandment gave
nothing 's the matter with it that i know of .
and tresses darker than the shade .
oh , lang the lassie i had woo'd !
the poor should bless the strange success
" ah , too high - placed is my desire !
to those related in my grand - dad 's ' narrative . '
or that the loves of this light world could bind ,
for loving thee , as one should love but heaven ;
in myself fold me ,
she who would wish us well .
between thirty and forty , one is distracted by the five lusts ;
calls to his millions to behold and see
yet why ye ride this way i know ,
from foe , or over friend made stronger claim :
hast thou not seen her ' mid life 's toils and jars ,
the peril grasp him , so beheld i change
transmute into gold . "â
their stable hopes , against which hell full tilt
but ye , ye are the same !
see how the aged trembling hands of day
and the dire secret of his house reveals ,
thou didst murder , too , my noble falcon ;
they drive home the cows from the pasture ,
the meadows of their infancy
children did .   he knew their glory was gone which formerly he
his smile was like the glitter
( for further notice see carlyle,--
and this , before he reached the cave , was seen .
clouds raining colours , gold and violet ,
i could not live and remember ,
for talking age and whispering lovers made .
is situate the fortunate calahorra ,
' tis all a myth that autumn grieves ,
but if they a whyle haue ron in the wynde
stamped with the tragedies of mighty ages
" yonder potter els well hem sclo . "
was dragg'd , and then lost hold and fell to ground .
but there were those amongst us all
no longer hold the warlike lingon down ,
an image draws , and in yourselves displays it
tandis que des masseurs , tout gonflés d'insolences ,
and swore they never saw such wee things ;
sum decepta tuis et amans et femina uerbis :
the big black caldron boiled so high
bring the ice - dust from pohyola ,
i answered conscience , " give me peace ,
it were a wrong , methought , to pass and look
of needful repose when thy day 's work was done .
was a mantelshelf of polished oak
toward the middle , at whose point unites
hubo magníficas fiestas ,
and , as o'ernight , from pummery ridge
the rain dripped from the waggons : the drops glid
amid that leafy rustle and that glisten
at once and taken thy wrung spirit home .
these have renounced it .   had ye only faith
open they stand ; of sounding brass all form'd ;
and if she said a thousand times , " i did
with our voices blithe and free ,
he is their captain unafraid ,
come , therefore , and let us from death ourselves
they can not hurt our eyes in any part
of mute despair , a suicidal throng :
scans all the sea toward denmark :
on summer eves to sing old songs ,
greatly softened down the expression of the original ; a literal
to my sage guide , relenting , when i heard
when nearing the eternal sea :
on thigh -- shields on their necks -- each lance in rest ,
i took a hansom on to - day ,
heroic ,
than for to lie in the greenwood ,
then , trilling out his last sweet melody ,
what charm for aching hearts _ he _ can reveal ,
they are no myths unto me--
whom thus i gnaw , i mingle speech and groan .
high souls like those far stars that come in sight
its gates were locked and watched , and none might pass
yowlynge with theyr folysshe songe and cry
low sunk in squalid , unprotected age ,
whilst nought of stone but in its heart doth ' bide .
dismounting then , he lean'd against a thorn ;
i found her out there
allurement ; she , fulfilment ; she ,
lies like a rod of rippled jade .
amang the braes o ' ballochmyle !
feminine epistolary style .
have heard your sweetest strain !
ah , geraldine ! my lady of sweet arts ,
below to bower above , admiring all .
and thou be hailed the second washington .
no man , nor any voice .   and thence i past
what words have past thy lips , adam severe ,
he see der schweitzer guard ,
but sleep eternally ! sicinius !
esteeming less the forfeit that he paid
ah ? benvenuto ? ' t is a masterpiece !
by other men were gained
breath for new woes , beside a fairy 's lake .
between the barren branches ,
if you 'd marry
on her lov'd daughter , that with moveless eye
when a bold infidel his poison spread ,
equall with him that gave a stalled oxe :
for of that grace him is begonne
and the day was won -- but the field was red --
there , between mountains magnificent , walks bury
oh , i am leal to the marching men ,
may prove their foe , and with repenting hand
the hiss of shavings drifted deep along the windy floor ;
alcander , halius , prytanis , and brave
the judge of torments and the king of teares ,
if no spark is in the ashes ,
i am the land that listens , i am the land that broods ;
where life began -- and where it ceases ?
that fits a man , like rock to tide ,
summa deum , pietas , cuius gratissima caelo
borrowed from the italian , and hurts an english ear .
look round the wide world ; and observe with a sigh ,
there from some friendly box ye'll draw
shrill came the night - wind ,
a priest , and not a victim at the shrine ;
he twice assay'd to cast his son in gold ;
into the depths of hate--
how that pine tree shouts and lurches !
they clash , combine and leap apart in turn .
who replied , " what wailing wight
the head of hakon jarl shall dissever ! "
_ coughing as she went . _
the li - on and the u - ni - corn were fight - ing for the crown
among their own they rest ;
thou , too , art near !
that flutters thro ' the unfettered dream .
upon my foam i have flung his head !
two golden wheels he set , on which ( a sight
wind of the western sea !
unlimited , ineffable , doth so speed
heir to vast estates and to lands long entailed ,
he wipes away an infant 's tears ,
disgrace , and which , by leading the way , may perhaps become the
where among the desert sands
we have won great glory , my men !
my brow .
of æsculapius , mounted at his side .
vsynge lyke folyes whan tyme is to
on the pavement of the cell ,
shook the weak hand that grasped it .
" while womb'd in space , primeval clay
alle þis meschef for me is made at þys tyme ,
" for pity 's sake , kind sir , be still !
till that almost all empty is the tun .
“ then thus address'd him;--o , most godlike youth !
and in our stiffened sinews we shall blend
a rustle , a call of night - watch in the grove ,
how close , how infinitely closer yet
the wilderness commanded with fierce mien .
that noblest gem that decks a crown ,
this is the folk who lost jerusalem ,
before them all to wait upon her . ”
sport and flutter on its snow .
a sin that tops all sins in shame
but hardship thou hast ne’er sustained .
lying ready are the rollers ,
in the boat the mast she lifted ,
bound with all its strings ,
and all at once the old man burst in sobs:--
i see it grasp , and grasping , break the toys
i yield myself forever
because i loved you more than any brother ,
do you devoutly do the like , till heav'n
but when , in swimming , he had reached the mouth
this annual festival of bees , these songs
polydamas exulted at his fall .
a bed by skilful workmen made ,
should guard the law which willed , whatever wight ,
for as he speaketh language known of none ,
description of the celestial venus--
and his heart melted , and in heaviness he spake to his own
the arrows off . but still between us
obtain'd from me , shall profit thee at last .
breathes softly through my closing strain ;
with a silver rapier by my side ,
the double front of a triumphall arke .
to think how her beauty is gone to decay .
" and , ' madam , ' quoth he " .   mr . lobban again quotes
would learn one lesson from a poor blind man !
he caught poor louis on the nose ,
boasted such a crew !
or foxlike in the vine ; nor cares to walk
who in such mighty armament had thought
when i think on the sweet smiles o ' my lassie ,
whether they keep their word . for that would be
to visit friends , who did much kindness show .
i saw the maid moon flee .
thus he ; but pleasing hopes his bosom warm
love , that while all ages run
a mystic language , perfect in each part .
together by one doom : ' and while he spoke
playmates of the warren ; her clumsy - footed , shaggy roamers ;
with splendid purple lay his head reclined .
even as the cunning workman brings to pass
o modest matrons , weep and wail !
while under arms and armour wreathed
whilst the affrighted earth does shake ,
watched at morning , watched at evening ,
gladness , in gaiety , and an incredible voice replying , " oh , sure ,
his brow the paleness and his locks the wave .
of the sea upon the skerry ;
and bad at first , they all grew worse .
faxit . cur ? volito vivus per ora virum .
she set hir on a gode palfrey ,
then iagoo , the great boaster ,
affection for a sire expressed .
for the kiss was a message from god ; i felt it and understood ,
found dewy pathways through the wheat ;
and from within his bosom drew
hae stood ahint the door .
how best to manage horse , lance , sword and shield ,
for the maiden of the prairie .
arrived in town , his journey done ,
the frost that freezes the life at my heart ,
more formidable hydra stands within ,
sceptre , star , and wingèd cloud ;
to the forge of ilmarinen .
i have call'd the dead from their graves .
they were all fair , and light as dreams ; anon
whom i accused above , and of their crimes ,
the hue of this delightful bow ,
his horses left far off ; while he himself
added , as one , who speaking keepeth back
i had fought death for you , better than he :
bud t’little jackanapes bein’deep ,
praise the lord , you 've got your health ;
in most intimate touch we meet ,
the fret and the pain of his age away . "
when our joys are dead ;
is , day by day , more scoop'd of all its good ,
an ' not a brother stirred
note these examples , drawe from this vyce your mynde
strong in faith , with mind subdued ,
the vespers of an empire -- one vast cry ,
vip'rous colored ; then close rings
love , on earth so feebly striving ,
he has dragged the most sacred of ties in the dust ,
kisses sweet as honey .
i waked the palms to laughter -- i tossed the scud in the breeze--
before a vessel 's prow .
and flew , oh , flew so wild a height
while death 's stern war - cry echoes far behind .
when most convinced of misery firmest then .
for th ’ rails are all laid , an ’ thair ’s nowt to be made ,
and , hanging on the words , felt all
i wus glad , it sho am true ;
ere the fresh tide of life has wasted low ,
at four and five and six o'clock
kept up the house .
heavy rocks , heavy trees , gold leaves
drawing all beauty to the point of living ,
our andy 's gone to battle now
magnificence of womanhood divine--
and these are things which ask a tender tear ,
he sleep nomore than doth a nightyngale .
queen of this universe , doe not believe
behind the door , behind the door ;
and tall he is , and fair he is , and none shall say him nay . "
how those celestial falcons from their seat
palpable , tangible , true ;
_ evil spirit _ . how different was it with thee , margy ,
her court in full renown .
and i plucked a branch to send to the north country .
own , caused them to be redoubled . ]
could play with dogs or sail a boat
who stirs little out of doors ,
graced what i deemed a desert of the mind ,
this too i know- and wise it were
also to wisdom better still than practice ,
that where commenced the soil and ceased the sea
upon a somewhat slender pittance ;
when bluff king hal desired his folk
like aaron 's serpent , swallows up the rest ,
ah ! for the change ' twixt now and then !
to capture or burn one new - york privateer !
smooth roads or rough roads , warm or winter weather ,
for all true hearts be blazoned on her tomb
semblance be
to find , at some place i shall come at , arms
" ye come to me and ask for bread ,
and fluttering with his skittish wings
if there breathe on earth a slave ,
disposition to shorten long poetical speeches .
_ pâle auréole du danger . _
v. 86 .   innocent . ]   pope innocent iii .
go with our sons on all their ways ,
lingring delays will teare my greeued hart ,
here , but has to fight for his life against overpowering
virtue and gain and love and joy ?
all wretched and forlorn !
think not of them , thou hast thy music too,--
he heard the story , and his scheme prepared ,
iove fearing , least if she should greater growe ,
while from her cottage garden - bed
the soul , like earth , hath silences
hide me in a shrine of roses ,
and sometimes pat us on the head ,
for as you know some critics may be here
letting all their beauty steal
from physical facts , to justify the mythical description of
say now , what was that sound which caught my ear ,
the bay , we have not won ?
annerthalb yar , anderthalb jahr,(ger . ) - year and a half .
and fearful is thy roaring wave ;
inflamed with hunger ’s wildest rage ,
from the sun will fall upon the altar and ignite
this done he seeks not high estate ;
she with a hand divinely free
he 'll be just simple mule forevermore ;
reach my desire ,
let me not now , ye gods , endure the grief
the flicker of a blood - red dawn ,
of sun and mist ,
our ships they were led by de grasse .
what anthropophagi are nine of ten
peonies , peonies crowned the may !
for when petreius knew
i have sent three shouts of freedom along the wind .
we guild the humble cheek of this chast place ;
thy brahma - blasphemy is ipecac
the gate that fronts the falling sun
they meet , but they never have spoken since that,--
and so i joined in roy 's bright changing chat ;
never a hope that we can not plumb
all i should have to do , would be
and vivien , frowning in true anger , said :
nor cast one longing , lingering look behind ?
or pays his priest to make it day by day ;
in earth or heaven ,
here with a loaf of bread beneath the bough ,
rising , this twentieth festal - tide ,
so well doth the weather
let the young psyche roam , a fleeting kiss :
of ancient history , sweet but less divine ;
lo , the stone from our faith 's great sepulchre torn
the babies that have no mothers any more .
who , like the ancient watchman on the towers ,
now you labour not with child . "
or walk with gods , and angels , but with men .
his course , by each star that would cross it , was set ,
thee .
parendi sine lege manet ? uice cuncta reguntur
a music all sweet
and ne’er would wrong a guiltless foe ;
and so she wandered where she pleased
to themperour hise sothes tolde ,
" now , matthew ! " said i " let us match
and that trold is burman swart .
and there i lay her who has been my hope ,
the waft of a leaf and the fall of a stone ;
it 's the stillness that fills me with peace .
and lonely want retired to die .
and i copied all the letters in a big round hand .
so far his cast outmeasured all beside ,
fortune made this delay to let us know ,
_ the captive germans , of gigantic size ,
he can not prove unkind , if ask'd of thee .
from eyes which , not to grieve me , brightly smiled .
lak a bottle full o ' ink .
back the murk of night
an ’ doant be long abaht it ;
and their great pines groan aghast ;
hey , and the rue grows bonie wi ' thyme ;
war a pestilent disease is on the body of the world--
if to see thee be to love thee .
would bid thee go even to our own house ; for there is no
new views to life , and teach us how to live ;
supported by infinite love .
in action faithful , and in honour clear !
thus did he speak , and they all held their peace throughout the
still , still to hear her tender - taken breath ,
hangs like a shattered canopy .
cold callous man!--he scorns to yield ,
no fretful whims appear'd to tease ;
regarding good of yesterday .
some greatest happiness for a greatest number ; ' attend , man ;
for the kid was cool as a pickle and fast as a midnight ghost .
mutely prophetic of a woe
joins heaven and earth , and mortal and divine ;
when all her sleights were void , her crafts were vain ,
to a good knight then dankwart shouted loud and strong ,
have been abolished .   all the magistrates
of wide hungarian danube , ' twas my lot
and as the tigre his time awaiteth
was worse than mount etna , vesuvius , or hell ;
and her sons with red shirts furnish .
and subjugate all sweetness but its own ?
lost in effect , while science seeks the cause .
o’er balconies and porticoes .
who think it strange to see
which was all on one side ;
heralding the better day ;
had from the helm uncased his head to view ;
thou shalt be what thou art ordained , no doubt ;
then did pohjola 's old mistress
but poor child feels that she must die ,
with over - weather'd ribs and ragged sails ,
asham'd of grief , he bade his eyes unclose ,
for giving such attention ,
no bigger than the moon .
pour from the neck of the flask the pure blood it contains ,
if the race all such sovereign types unknows .
sweet carols fill the air ;
to give , of him inquires the english knight
remember'd food ; and now the rocks among
a hair like golden wire ;
yielded them , side - long as they sat recline
( 7 )   " balmung " .   in the older norse version and in the
from the gilded spontoon to the fife i was ready ,
and he drew near and talked with them ,
for a cause or for a lass
her welfare and renown ,
to do this senseless shameless deed .
bore it to a neighbouring water - fountain ,
and learn in coming : let me free
hearth and home and wife and child ?
" if you will not heed their presence ,
at length a lofty steeple caught his eye ,
a nation 's song ascends to heaven ,
thereupon smith ilmarinen
trout in the burn grow great as herr'n ' ;
of time no more .
and later , doubts and jealousies awaken ,
gathered in my eyes sad tears ,
awake all men do lust for thee ,
the wind was in their hair ,
or who raises me up      when rest is denied me ,
mille pharetrati ludunt in margine fratres ,
now , hey , bonny boat , and ho , bonny boat ,
this miracle a name--
the realization of a hope deferred .
like cornelia 's , the good roman matron of yore .
of a steep wilderness , whose hairy sides
awhile , uncertain , o'er its watery bed ,
in suffering : wealth undeserved is heaped
" of all that wisdom and the fame
imam petit gehennam
answered in the words that follow :
luck be with him ! zeus vouchsafe him some good thing in his
odysseus went to see that evil ilios , never to be named .
" and lo ! beside that mainmast tree
and moonshine , and the dew ,
and think of the sorrowful spirit that sings ,
shall be as constant as its gentle star .
my tedious hours , and lighten every toil ,
dwinin ' , wasting , fading .
we 're all of us more or less children at heart .
" all that the grave may please to say ,
that so he might be near at every need ,
embalm'd in the holiness worship bedews ,
for thought constreynt & greuous heuynes
( yet methinks certain , or as good as certain , at the last , ) the
though the way of the lord be steep !
an ' first felt the power of a love - rollin ' e'e .
beside numicus , those that plough rutulian holt and hill ,
it fell tumble - dum - down .
seems , on the whole , the proper thing to do--
the miner , all day long ,
ah , kill me , kiss me , curse me , thou !
long must he mourn , and long be his scourging ,
and custom bids thee without shame receive ;
comes the calm " johnny who upset the coach . "[h ]
than even the chanting of the sutra in the service
dark moral knots , that pose the seer ,
and spikes of purple lavender ,
the swallow , oft , beneath my thatch
there beach'd beside the hoary sea , the ships
there shall æneas ' house be lords o'er every earth and sea ,
with crimes and blood his hands embruing ?
lowly , holy one !
o them wor the days aw knew no despair ;
him , sinless son , thy refuge know .
shall rue the grecian maiden 's vow .
spring has brought with it a multitude of gay volumes . american
alas ! who will tend the old vine ,
a jest at the most .
and for your sake my bleeding heart
ah , come in ; come in . _
didst thou not know how well i loved her -- how
when i composed the fustian brain
of life , even in blameless arcady .
oft with our souls in our eyes all day we fed
and his wrinkled cheeks and his squinting eyes
but now let each becalm his troubled breast ,
to make thy ways my ways , thy service mine ,
durch böser buben hand verderben ,
mind night and day , and beseech the captains of your allies to
her spouse and sons had taken ,
of rolling smoke becomes a wreathed splendour
is not a mere house to be lived in , for you .
a jingling crowd -- the sixty - four pints ,
an ' thet eppyletts worn't the best mark of a saint ;
sublimity ; he will be allowed , if he has less fire , to have more
the little priest of felton ,
douce - stappin ' in the stoury track ,
and tore the ponderous belt in triumph from his breast ;
' mother , i lied to you that time , o forgive ,
and can not harmed be with little power ,
an old smoaked blanket arches oer his head ,
from the father of gods and men .
shoulder to shoulder and side to side ,
christianity . the term " patriot " is commonly applied to political
and in the carriage - chest , meantime , the queen ,
this is my dream of death .
how long i 've toiled to sweep these cobwebs from the brain ,
your social order , too !
let all the virgins therefore well await :
and early dreams;--for travelling o'er the hills ,
thou wilt not with predestined evil round
many staue liu'd to an vnpittied death ,
while they 're boiling -- there 's two ,
it were superfluous to state . "
by cautious archer , practised in his lore ,
impendent atrae formidinis ora superne .
but dimly on the far horizon 's edge .
a noun , as in or through a door ,
breathes forth from such a love , that all the world
we 've lovesick people sitting near ,
to the sea side ; they drew the vessel into the water and got her
and something previous even to taste--'tis sense .
i 'd stamp under feet the base book of his science ,
the pup he 's hungry to possess
noisy was the door .
should these heroes come to woo thee ,
i myself move abroad swift - rising flying then ,
goethe dealt .   beyond them were the two other elements of the
now o'er babbling brooks it beams ;
thei wente forth upon here weie .
ese laurel frondoso
the personages of greek poetry ; the familiar manners of a late
what mortall nymph or deity
he fills the whole room , so huge he 's grown ,
they wage the desperate fight ; then satiate
" know ye , whoever of my name would ask ,
for this , the boon for which he poured
my brother ben has gone to sea . he has gone in a big ship . mother
of northern climes and british ladies . "
whusky an ' he were pack thegether .
he is wrinkled , thin , and hoary ,
and see the poor birds how they fly to and fro ,
ac þeo , þat god iknoweþ , heo wyten myd iwisse ,
the range of the marshes , the liberal marshes of glynn .
breaking the foam of dark forests ,
twinkling so clear , though a sad night lower !
his mind by fear disorder'd ; from his hands
pointed towards them , and they rushed upon it !
the drowsy lights along the paths
which claimed as for its own the fragments borne
to hide your blemishes use paint ,
something kindred in ancestry ,
to the hearts that were under his power .
by soldiers battered down ,
great in orchomenos , in pylos great ,
his vogue and his verve are alarming ,
living but to yearn
the wily fox with stealthy tread
her gown 's white folds among .
no time , nor trick of law , their action bars :
by no means would produce the town 's submission ,
deceived and ill dispos'd : and i it was ,
to irrigate the dryness of decline ;
they would n’t give us butter , so we forced down bread and
but , scorning what she did ,
whose happines the heavens envying ,
and moondrawn spectres dance upon the ground ;
down by the river 's side .
marphisa , now the bridal was deferred ,
now , without further help , if with good heed
blinded by rays of deity .
these limbs , these hands , young friend ! ( their vigor lost )
  abbreviation of _ kannin _ , " forbearance , "
and answer as man to man ,
phoebei referens uerticis alta decus ;
but always keep them close unto the wood . "
thae ither folk , for richt or wrang ,
his mother , he cried out to come to her :
for are not they , likewise , children of god ?
hail , the northern three !
what share in its fierce gloom ? has your heart broken
whate'er we say or seem ,
a cauld day and a snell ,
niobe in distress for her children slain by apollo ,
to the cheek by jowl :
swayed by my voice , by mine example led ;
these wanton wowers and suche wylde company
and he said : " o guests ! why is it
compare also p. 262 , where he considers erechtheus " as a divine
and falter'd , wi ' his dying breath ,
what angel there
sitt'st to behold thy sacred show ,
his well - tim'd errand pictur'd in his face .
so much one man can do
forgotten there , and ghastly bursts of song .
is oftest yours , the latter most is ours ,
mellow with learning lightly took the word
shoulder
thus goaded , like a generous steed
lived his life in this world , when his happiness arrived ,
our body from the grave returns ;
who upon earth for us wast crucified ,
approached its bloody end ; yea , even that noon
triste ou joyeux ,
how doth it with sweet valborg fare ,
and put it to her mouth . rose and she supt
those grappling clamber up and load the decks ,
a short account of taliesin and elphin
in these fierce words an utterance found :
upon the pinions of the wind .
and all thy knots with nettles tie . ”
the pictured walls the place became :
and added courage to the pagans most ,
and there upon a poplar ,
x         faith , which alone justifies , exists not without
we came along , and held the summit , when
i say we entered on a plain of sand
thou , toothache , surely bear'st the bell
a glass and a toast and a song and a rhyme
at the first notes , irregular and sharp ,
fine his hands , his fingers tender ,
thou the ruler of the heavens ,
sweet is the lily 's silver bell ,
in bowing the knee
asleep in the sea and sky ,
all crowded is the deck ;
for him whose patriot task is done !
...   huge above everything my human face wanders--
_ one of the multitude . _ but if we threaten thee , or bear her off ,
saw wherefore i was silent , prompted me
and the garden furrows to set .
before the knee of christ :      the king in splendor
i hope i shall meet her again .
this is what the children said .
and by the other , in mid visage , through
curtains drawn ,
but wait the sheriff 's beck .
ther he fered not eylle .
of sharp green striving toward the day !
i know not whether laws be right ,
is store of treasures fair to see ,
in the shade of the apple - tree .
how god thus to the sharpest wind
how poor an end of that solicitude
you 'll hear from us our neighbor 's praises .
for that worst love that stabs and breaks and kills .
and how one warm september day ,
but we may taste your solace sweet
de hijos y de hermanos
it is a british soldier , who , in spain ,
alienas , suas ut auro locupletent domos .
this glads thy palate , that thy health repairs .
lone cytherean ! now all silently
ransack their el dorados of the west ,
the village maid , with hand on brow
soothed by the lulling sound of grove and stream ,
such things you saw , such things made others see .
bedewed with tears was every cheek
soon will autumn bid it fade .
himself .
yet if you could bring about ,
fresh wondthers grows
upward steals the life of man ,
that when troubles gather
and the harebell shakes on the windy hill--
makes fame itself his servant , not his lord ;
god will smite thee — god , the old blood - shedder . { 99 }
my feeble strength , and left me ruined and lost ,
where rolls yon smoke , yon tumbling ocean raves ;
and the wind is yodling to me
th ' angelic name , and thinner left the throng
as she likes , for materials her time out will last .
six sep'rate times ( or three times twice ) ,
o lay thy loof , & c.
such are the themes this man of pathos ,
can do no mischief there .
soft pity touch'd the mighty master 's soul :
that he , too , might find a drop there ;
on massive knobs of jasper stand
delit þe lo{m}be forto deuise ,
but sometimes , when she goes astray ,
alone can claim the wreath of patriotism .
ever loving more and more ;
“ we ’ve been here ! ”
where when the god he question'd if ' twas meant
though foes beset them upon either hand , on the one side that
then let thy ráma go with me .
well the hell - fiend knew they must endure god 's anger and the
vainly touched the harp of beauty .
who brought the message of good - will to men ,
once came venus to me , bringing
the boatswain 's whistle piping shrill ,
and left the confines of the grave
two beacons seem , that men to arms assemble ,
o voice ! that is all sound ,
so placed as to impede the fire of those
wherever you went
l. 317 . _ bright abyss _ , the bright hollow of heaven .
they sought him all the forest thorough ;
and they hae sworn a solemn oath
for _ tenths _ thus all at _ sixes _ and _ sevens _ ,
the lawyer wiped his spectacles ,
once more we heard that fairy tune :
and lady - loves for spidery lace
and at their labor sing .
by tago 's nymphs embalm'd with many a tear ;
they safely in th ' eternal poet shine .
as when the full moon floods the skies
nor bee or hive you have be mute ,
the partiarch had slain before the fonts .
disdained them , from the sky ,
when charlie strikes the street .
and , weary if the way ,
" and now , oh wind , that here among the leaves
trembles with bliss .
has dirtied his own freedom , cozen'd all
but when it comes to bein ' killed -- i tell ye i felt streaked
she mourns lak i moans fer my love ,
not adamant or steel . your direst dread
ardour shall i pronounce it at the hour of death !
fifty thousand good knights they are , by count ;
to bind the strong , and set the prisoner free .
for be monnes lode neuer so luþer , þe lyf is ay swete
but leave these scarlet cups to spotted moths
now help me , lady , since ye may and can ,
much less can bird with beast , or fish with fowle
at heav'ns high feasts to have fed : yet what compare ?
and the bird is near destruction .
all the long day through ,
the monarch is not glorified
musing there i lay .
how they hae taen bauld kinmont willie ,
naughty , she laughs and thinks it great fun .
of the fierce dog - star , that lays bare the fields ,
needs must the serpent now his capital bruise
to tell it at thy call ;
on " the congo " , etc .
steamer ... and barque ... and churning tug and tow ,
contracts and concentrates , withdraws ;
that it would happen when two poets
then i turned to the wall again .
his mynde styll museth of falshode and on gyle
softly she kissed him , and a bliss ,
then were we both of fancy free
inside .
enkindling dawns of memory ,
through arid plains of kandahar ,
and sche which mai the hertes bynde
threaten'd ruin unto all ,
o'er nameless sorrow 's churchyard pillow .
with silent tears my cheeks are wet ,
to vote for whitelaw reid .
with buzzing wings she hung aloft , then near and nearer drew,--
then tapp'd his stirrup as before ,
a mother 's fond heart broke ,
the nightingale , so soon as april bringeth
come from my first , ay , come !
as if they strove to please me well .
my bonds , o fakir !
gives forth the odors of her burning heart ,
in abergenoli is the grave of pryderi ,
hypermetrical syllables , 58 - 60 .
and she put it to her nosy ,
but lieth cold and numb ... and the dawn will not come .
over it had made straight the line,--doorposts also had he
the things that was which i ' ave seen ,
greeted their safe escape to me .
as one who through the thicket thrusts , and unawares doth tread
swelled upward , like some vast cathedral - dome ,
she found me roots of relish sweet ,
ys imi rwydd arglwydd , erglywiad
but of the portion which attack'd by water ,
bumpety , bumpety , bump ,
for his rival death .
at which i ceased , and listened them awhile ,
weird legends from the forests , with a scoff
shaver , a funny fellow .
only a ringlet of flaxen hair ,
o moaning wind ! what had we done
in the sapphic strophe of francisco de la torre ( d. 1594 ) ,
then had the sons of god excuse to have been
i 'd save him from the certain death that waits him .
there is that women should go forth to war . "
he lived in the morning sunlight ,
á su receloso amante
' bring me this man , ' the caliph cried : the man
who both arms round her throws ,
help you against the suitors . i should have killed a great many
had they freshly in mind      remembered the favors ,
we sat beneath the trees , as well thou know'st ,
may be powerless in battle .
as light of heart as they .
when day was anciently destroyed by night
the varying green sets forth the glitter of the gold .
red sard , and marble sphere , and agile prow
the king sent us , etc .
rose from your side , opened the box of doom ,
had wrought , since thus the shout had pow'r to move thee .
and , though he loved the _ tabard _ for a - while ,
spake these words in meditation :
let 's raise our banner high ,
the flowers still grew there : far on the sea 's waste
now ben he resolved , one fine saturday night ,
how happy a youngster feels .
and he is lord of thousands more than thou .
wainamoinen plays unceasing ,
reproaching you , " ah , fi ! it was ill done ! "
hoy , sin miedo que libre escandalice ,
" whate'er we leave to god , god does , " verse , 396 .
june is a yellow cup i 'll not name ; august
their homely joys , and destiny obscure ;
" purple calico , three quarters wide , six yards . "
farmers of vercheres ,
somewhere , out in the darkness ,
its rays of light reflecting o'er this moral atmosphere ,
was naked of me , when within these walls
he gave them food and bed ,
of all that truth or fancy asks for bliss ;
and that mighty judgment - vision
as gave to beauties that might be
in one respect i fill the bill
can you bear me to talk with you frankly ?   there is much that
" joy , " answereth it from eyes
to fecht with him beth day and nycht ,
then juno thus to pallas spoke : " no more ,
" if it was n't for elkanah , there , to holler that to me , with an
for it reckoned without its host ,
arose from her seat , and blushing , in an animated tone of voice ,
but he , not mindless of his mother 's pray'r ,
cheerful and happy was his mood ,
that upon many sides the stars appeared .
there in the windless quiet , from out the folded black ,
found her within . a fire on all the hearth
" this cup remove,--yet , lord , thy will be done . "
but with unminished full - orbed lustre glows .
dance , and architecture , and statuary , and painting ; they are the
methought i heard my father address me in these
and she : " shouldst thou be silent , or deny
heuen - ryche , the kingdom of heaven , a. 719 ; c. 14 .
might worship it , and fall on lowest staire .
my part
ez wus eber knowed by you ;
she cursed her hard and evil destiny ;
and now , alas , he 's over four ,
that hold in hate the tilled places between cecina and corneto
attributes to the old women in his pieces , as to staphyla in the
to wepe , and in thy bedde to iouken thus .
but since we have in this delightful bed
lord of the universe ! hail , narsingh , hail !
" i have no name ;
shall come to that lavinian land,--leave fear thereof afar :
from heaven , his store of merit spent ,
from the lake he drew the rudder ,
sleeping of the lids ,
’ bove every thing of the youthful king ,
to whom the king : " whoe'er of human race
to rest thy soul , at least , if shadows know ,
may strive with magic spells to turn astray
_ frosch _ . bravo ! bravo ! that was fine !
then jove again the trojan courage fir'd ,
while others are fightin ' we 're readin ' or writin'--
caught me , ev'n as a mother that from sleep
i beat forever
we stumble , cursing , on the slippery duck - boards ,
a faithful nurse thou hast ; the dam that did thee yean
“ go then , o ráma , and begin
immortal mercy ! and the sense which follows
till god 's judgments forth are hurled .
by fire and sword shall yet turn england broken
to clothe , in outward grandeur , grand design ,
nor can the sweetest pasture stay
grumbling hard as is their habit .
for to benefit the nation ,
ask me no more .
the horse he drove , the boat he sold , the chill
unknown his childhood , save that he was born
case is a lawyer , that ne'er pleads alone ,
with sorrow 's minor keys .
with spouting gore must bathe thy cruel shrine .
i would rather walk with him by faith ,
were damnably mistaken ; few are slow
before the close of that short winter day .
upon the brink of night ?
was in aegina the whole people sick ,
but love the feeble when they hate the strong .
_ in our rude camp we drill the whole day long _ .
the saints and sages in history -- but you yourself ?
word , and went in and worked on that fellow for
" the meal unshared is food unblest
and then went to work a big trap to set .
must conclude imps of the pit ) who sundry times captained
you and i.
and when it almost gayly jumped and flowed ,
transported , to their sire they bound ,
an ' she ai n't by ' erself , old mis , in dat--
and all this throve before i wedded thee ,
esse simul dominos gratior ordo piis .
alike are grown thy subject of disgrace .
at this , through all his bulk an agony
while thus they toil unguided , rough the storm
since adam , with a fall or with an apple .
and while i hark , before my door ,
stood on a day in his malencolye
and now the muse , with mortal woes impress'd ,
on my poor musie ;
of holy cross upon his breast rollánd
what aince was sweet is bitter now ,
ah ! when she sings , all music else be still ,
lingers in sombre silence all the day ,
our hedges like a wanton courtesan
inuertere satis immanis dentibus hydri ,
which , in its bitter fruiting , bore
whose blood the conquering foe conspired to spill
from gades ' and from climes adown the south ,
in the dark earth ; the summer moon
but heaven 's high magic bound it there ,
of which they had no reason to complain .
the abbot . 2 vols .
thy music brings this broil at ease ,
and touse the tambourine
think not the watchful dim despair
to bar their way , upstirring storm on storm ,
the so - called german drama , therefore , is english in its origin ,
through ice and cold in sun and air ,
from the ground the quills he gathered ,
there with him to offer battle ;
deep in the heart , her searching view
harnesses the flaming stallion ,
with all his loose an ' roarin ' ways
and sing a song of the days that were ,
there was no need to hurry home at all ,
is tasseled rosy red .
time is it that you and i won something more than races .
there was music in her tone ,
and fac'd grim danger 's loudest roar ,
tenderly as mother 's arm ,
whalebone and reindeer - skins ,
in the great æther of existence rise ,
soon the frail eggs they shall
rising and falling all around her path .
and he only hit the key
do pain create , and for the pain an outlet .
fahrende schueler stehen davor .
i shaaesaes to day , so god me spede :
or a silly bairn at school
the tiny fire leaps in your eyes a moment ,
the very place whereon her footsteps were .
and if she never did forget
sailing over the waters ,
the swarming legions of the foe are found ,
king richard , coeur de lion .
lit by the summer 's radiating sheen .
where the sweetlings grew ?
who fall in victory 's arms :
of such as , wandering near her secret bower ,
who made apparent to me thy affection ,
" of what earthly use to me
each aim'd at other ; proudly eminent
and quaff up a bowl
grew to such evil that the holy cup
and " prussian " discipline and rule ,
for thou must die .
and down into the secrets of the glens ,
that sphinx , whose words would ever be a doubt ,
and the costly gowns that fold thee ,
hale to his home , and in haste return .
then erasing and repainting
with the ashes of their campfires ,
the cloudless ether enfolds them , and they are radiant with
a sunset charm around her , and illume
yet , in the midst of grief and desolation ,
“ an exile roam for life , than monarch rule
she has such a penchant for bothering me too !
somewhere rich embroideries
the root was joy , the stem was pain ,
the shield of gawain blazoned rich and bright ,
of thine immortal rule . fain would i see ,
venture thou to dream , then , and to wander
" in the footsteps of st . paul , "
both these decisions are surely exaggerated .   the play , like many
with tranquil waters overflowed ;
spent and dishonored and sad ,
i was blamed by all the household ,
and the " great spirit " still to them is god ;
ar . thy voice forbids more than thy words invite :
these , my lord , are my views : i have resolved from the maturest
this offer was rejected ; and the apothecaries who had engaged to
be ready to release as to receive .
_ respectfully dedicated to the war clergy of the united states . _
the noonday approaches
" with you , do n't think i 'll bate a stiver !
and there was joyance in their sound .
five heroes lead , and following , see
he march'd with twice eleven in his train ;
to even intolerable woes ,
to broad bayou ' neath hazy - golden skies .
spirit of chivalry .   " agi " is understood by the commentators whom
each gleaming point of light is like a seed
would thou hae nobles ' patronage ?
begins :
did rest them , and were mute .   o nymph divine
i may repay thee in the world above ,
“ i trust no cares invade thy peace ,
so dad mcguire , in therapeutics skilled
and bright with blood for woad .
and there for three days ’ silent space
x         to the venerable man , master tournay , & c.          cl .
the pensive selima , reclined ,
bitterer than death , yielded himself to die .
the pipes at lucknow played .
had still a father , who supported him ,
we went to france to fight , we go to france
with double valor would he salve that sore .
draw near , almighty father ,
but , finding soon a smoother road
which nine times hems the ghosts , to upper light
from its weary body close - enwrapt in slumber
descried from their top is the oncoming foe ;
grounds of popularity of roman tragedy
my dreams would grow supremely new and whole .
from the dark fen the oxen 's low
can mortals in these ills relieve ?
circular ruin , which the peasants call " the tower of hannibal the
in that soft choiring of delight
but a small company ,
the curse is finally expiated .
and all the sea was ink ,
italian true , but in a muslim mouth--
a tongue to speak with answering heaven gave they .
and to deform and kill the things whereon we feed .
this work for which ye crave will i perform--
to the greatest advantage , when coming up here ;
let all his furious mettle / in slaughter of his foes be seen .
but in the mount that lies from eden north ,
and ' the city bushman ' , included in this selection ,
the sire , who dozed by the decanters ,
an ' the nations a ' live happy in their ain countrie .
full of sweetness , full of woe ,
if i were a swift cloud to fly with thee ;
it was the little malfred ,
and pangs of absence , learned a remedy ;
the stars that ' twixt the rise and fall ,
its music , lest it should not find
grew wroth , and would have cast his veil of cloud
a song rose o'er the waters wild :
and takth the badde for the goode ,
neither on plain nor mountain . these last moreover would rest for
but many there be , and i know them well ,
we 've a nun here ( called therese ) ,
on a withered and broken stem .
tell , oh , tell me , grizzled - face ,
i leet on their buried hoard--
" thy creature , who fain would not wander from thee !
trust to good verses then ;
the greeting christ is risen !
thence rávan king of giants stole
and this was called ' the tournament of youth : '
' how many miles is it to thy true love ?
appetite for knowledge too eager to be nice .   in a mind like his ,
the piper plays ....
" the moghra flowers , the moghra flowers ,
' tis there of yore the robber band
you 'll say it ,
rode homeward , silent and most pale and strange ,
and with a father ’s rapture pressed
so hearts that are fainting
lie scattered in his ruinous path.-
how that they wake , whan they slepen softe ;
he pity gave ere charity began .
then i must never waste a bit
drop them o'er my brow in showers .
detulit ex helicone perenni fronde coronam ,
your voice is like bells over roofs at dawn
' mid circling horrors yields at last
farewell!--but whenever you welcome the hour .
sum up the various ills of life ,
it speaks of war not peace ;
in silence i 'll take my way :
komm , lieber abend , neider
his jaws , and the fangs show'd us ; not a limb
pull with strength of youthful heroes ,
hail , hail to thee !
and deathly odours crept about ,
' as we danced i gently drew it
as one through indolence is wo nt to stand .
the fruitage ripens and the flow'rets blow !
while the green corn has a system of its own ;
that ever fired the poet 's soul , or drew
and knight and squire disarm'd ,
what life in all that ample body , say ?
here in this radiant and immortal street
and leave me to the earth , which is mine own
what lack is there of any jocund thing
white , with a tiny pink vine overrun:--
i had a friend , ere my first ship sailed ,
waiting in a big tureen !
the face belongs to the name ,
she never lened , nor stood in awe ,
blessed of our fathers ' god ! "
this did n't strike the folk he met -- it struck them later on ) .
though frankincense the deities require ,
is somewhere else , and not in the three chapels .
' tis music when she talks ; ' tis air
and will not take their flight ,
here the " subject " vaguely smiled .
to the town hall came flocking :
how they cheered us , and -- never mind -- meant it all right ;
plead love , " and stay with me .
hast thou not glimpses , in the twilight here ,
are not brave men of noble birth now wand'ring in mis'ry ?
looked oft , but oftener fearing who might wake .
now softly distant , now more near ;
then out upon the silly fool
and listen , in breathless silence ,
is numbered with the slain .
to tell 'em would a hundred tongues require ,
no longer we tread
to god , befitting the new grace vouchsaf'd .
roughly is jerked up to daylight .
as bornyst syluer þe lef onslydeȝ ,
_ may _ judge their cause and , greatly rous'd , command ,
built on the edge of the sea - sands brown . . .
honeyed is the dance 's sway ,
a song will help the beating storm to bear .
his mirth left suttu smileless .
longaque per certos signantur tempora casus .
there sweet sleep is not for the weary brain ;
and can this fragrant lawn
and darkness wraps him as the cloud a star .
about holly ?
long she resists , but what can nymph attain ,
lord marmion gave attention cold ,
who , kissing , kill such saints as these ?
so grand old colia ’s genius on this january morn ,
" you say that two at conway dwell ,
in the wood of gabriel salter ,
i have seven stalwart brothers ,
and pluck the lettuce growing in my garden .
( ' orse - gunners , listen to my song ! )
they fill true - lovers ' drink - horns up ,
found him , and in what manner , was exprest ;
sae fresh and bonnilie ;
and from the silver beach 's side
his bed - fellow , his daily , life - long comrade ;
cato thus recalled
through night to light ! and though to mortal eyes
little spring sat down and whimpered ,
of a strange company around
high o'er celestial mountains wing'd in flight ;
like music , songs , or floods of light ,
soon emptied my strong box ;
as they toddled round and round ;
no rude sound shall reach thine ear ,
now and henceforth flaunt from these shores .
grassetur gnidiae sulcus harundinis ,
and thy brother is a stranger ,
left the fleetest deer behind him ,
the little creek goes winding
sporting in joyous race :
that i witnesse scholde drawe ,
the tinker , now reclaimed by god 's almighty power ,
the boys are loafing
and it may be that we who live
the gibes and scorns i uttered here .
for all the dames of the saxon land ;
by all my hopes of heaven , my words are true .
and profit gained slower the longer would last .
from passion 's dross refined and clear ,
her dowff excuses pat me mad ;
my love in her attire doth shew her wit ,
and keep revel and drink the dark wine recklessly ; and , lo ,
the name of the vanquished king is spelt in a variety of ways :
all dressed in misty white ,
to fasten with their seal mine eyes .
evil storms , and air grows dusk ,
and the clock 's alarum was set .   and now
as are the plants , whereon they grew whilere .
fareweel , fareweel ! parting silence is sad ;
what is left us but to wait ,
youth laughing went with love away .
and rise on strong exulting wing
schal synful & sakleȝ suffer al on payne ;
" all is of god that is , and is to be ;
the blight that this world o'er the warmest will steal :
which with its tail doth smite amain the nations ,
contented .   but the blessed agapete ,
each other 's lips , the clinging secrecies
a warrior of renown , but never wore
we feign some thing , one of its kind and sole
i schal the telle hou it is seid .
temporibvs nostris aetas cum cedat auorum
by daily abstinence and nightly prayer ;
thy limbs and breast transpired ,
_ aabccbddbeebffgggf _
clap in your pincers , and then tear away.--
" i should n't mind . or , yes , i should , rather . where 's it to be ? "
the surplus of a generous providence .
with labour sore , and frustrate of their end ;
to bloom no more in youth 's glad may ;
like health and beauty vying in the race .
but i seed ' er do clean twenty foot across the ' eathly brook .
" but a place in her annuals , lady , be thine !
and is of slowe the sloweste .
« cubre la gente el suelo ,
the lead began to pour .
the light of joy again .
she kissed his pale forehead and answered him : " live ,
will not unwillingly their place resign ;
i for conclusion of my tale will say ,
of the loath'd pool , turning meanwhile our eyes
soon as arriv'd , they with an eye askance
there is the silence of a great hatred ,
convinces all men , even a politician ;
and wait for supports like a soldier .
so , stick up ivy and the bays ,
for twice the age of man !
yea , bore once again to the haunts whence i came ,
along the forest path ;
beyond go home ; he joined the steamer 's crew .
still unprofaned -- by human nature 's sight .
fear ever argues a degenerate kind ;
she looked at him with almost haughty air ,
you may stay among your children who are swinging on the gate .
to let the soul go free .
near , or remote , while all beside is still ;
ever , for her sake .
this while alcina to console me tries ,
what full effusion of the grateful heart ,
while their affrighted soules , now wing'd for flight
where things lie undistinguished , scarcely seen .
chose to impart to thy apparent need ,
within my twentie yeares of age ,
before the man,--for privily she came ,
it seems to me more than all the print i have read in my life .
and love but her for ever ;
then with uplifted hands he pray'd aloud :
of the dews that gem his breast ;
.     .     .     .     .
of good men , and to nether darkness sink
bed for the petals fallen from the wreath of her royal lover , the
innuptarum'--'funera nec funera , ' etc . , etc . mr . ellis 's
how his own people will receive their prophet ,
" the duke of zealand , meaning for biscay ;
splendidly daring !
with deathless grace .
fell on all from far ;
death , that absolves my birth ; a curse without it !
sank the weary man in slumber ,
but he that loves the lowly , pours his oil upon my head
give these vapor - baths new virtues ,
her simple , homely life commences ,
ah ! gone is the old necromancy ,
smiled and whispered , ' i forgive ' ;
such ruin follow from the faulchion 's sway ,
tells -- but i tell not , wanton may !
promise now sought fulfillment,--it was time ;
boasters of liberty , fast bound in chains !
who looked out at the depths of the night ;
lifted to meet the angel lips of air .
live unabashed if the arguing world stood by .
as round a god ; and mothers showed their babes ,
a boy with eyes that sparkled like a rod
wake her up !   shake her up !   try her with the mainsail !
of common superstition -- be not wroth
both of his hands upon the grass outspread
w'en five frenchman kill a score !
then he stalked around ,
long time i heard , and swelled , and blushed , and frowned ;
or perhaps it had never been well .
cried the fierce kabibonokka ,
plucked in the garden , all the summer through
ask your own heart , and nothing is so plain ;
the place seem a boudoir .   the deep winey shade
flammiferam hanc uim quae me excruciat .
tho ' yet unseen , may hover round our way ,
who and what gave to me the wish to woo thee--
that the gods had brightly burnished ,
' t is an illusion
all beauty , shape and comeliness ,
the world , whose every nook dark shadows fill .
' tis not in doing what he would but can .
i am sure he 'll come no more .   best wait till then . "
a sad tradition of unhappy love ,
and did put on a human form and face .
that tiger - lilies could be heard
sie mußten beide sterben ,
and , howsoever envy grudge their state ,
of that young man in his most joyous days ,
to lie at last .
your brains grow low , your bellies swell up high ,
and twentie thousand ( i thir number heard )
for onely god knoweth our mynde and hart
say not they darkened , lacking food and sleep
burnie , dim . of burn , a rivulet .
a boy so deserving your tindhr'est affection:--
my heart was like an altar lit with flame ,
the slain he would fain awaken .
in puzzling all that 's clear and right ,
their gods came down and mingled in the fight
shall bid me come , shall bid me come ;
her snaring smiles , sweet nature 's wiles ,
towards the fountain tower - guarded where
“ for joseph he has not forgot
and cooled at the brookside my brow and throat .
how much thou hast to give content !
soon reached the camp upon the wold .
i wan to a water by schore þat schereȝ ,
and life and death fight equal in her will .
and put her fortitude to proof ;
and thou , with kith and kin and friend ,
his loose right arm pillowing his head .
' i was betrayed : i will not stay . '
but now to claims of duty blind
i have sung the body and the soul , war and peace have i sung , and
and i light my little corn - cob , and i linger , softly dreaming ,
and now beneath the with'ring blast
bestowed them on your sculptored sires
it 's wiser being good than bad ;
their forme surpassing farre the fetter'd staves ,
above , below , disclosing grove and ground ,
and comes from god to men -- this rising in me ,
the slacke skin about his necke shaketh
then rose a blast of sound upon the air
in beauty , yet without a name ,
the work , and his new master satisfy .
and aiblins ane been better
with wounded pride and dulled ambition ,
outcaste they wait at the village gate
' but i am his duty , ' quoth love as he flew .
presides , and _ virtue _ bears no price ,
not his the dignity that bends to bear
" poor fellow ! " croons - and pity lends
and made me notice more his courtesy .
in this desire alone i hither steer :
buy my english posies !
of troy . vouchsafe me then this prayer -- suffer us to escape at
needle 's eye , as follows :
no sympathetic sob or sigh
my way through the gulf yonder , till the wind bare and the
if lovers , cupid , are thy care ,
some fire cried , which some denied ,
but they 're no more like tigers than the dogwood 's like a dog ,
death 's admonitions , like shafts upwards shot ,
the great are fallen , the wise men gone .
now we 've lost him , so they say : i think the tall thin man
this blossom of the gallows tree !
wheel and dance the savage crowd ,
they lack not weight . "   i spake ; and on me straight
bleat that two and two is four !
anchor and cable of a ship sublime .
with his own hand , the priesthood of the sun .
mother , my soul is crucified , my thirst is past belief .
as their summits blazed , he could stand undazed
on what belongs to him alone ;
the genii of the stream :
as might fair , sleeping gods wake to delight .
a little lad , i ran to seek my fortune on the main ;
who but owns their magic sway !
from them , through terrour of impending death ,
this pond and beauteous hill of moss ,
grew taciturn and thinner ,
me to the city disguised as a miserable old beggar . if you see
lives in the canvas ; hers , some artist lost ,
thy youth to hopeless wasting , root and stem--
for thou wilt learn naught which thou ask'st of me .
thy king from warfare to dissuade
the lovely nyse and nerine spring
what ruin glares ! what carnage swims !
under an hell ther is a cave ,
were fain to battle for their lord.(976 )
the vine 's deep flush the purpling seid assumes ,
yet thou wert far away .
never again shall i lie by kānu 's side . '
remember charles they murdered ,
with might charge freedom 's heroes ,
and i see the lightning flashing from the edge of yon black
" magnificent o'er ali 's beauteous eyes .
they all are perjur'd and unkind ;
no doubt you would fancy the world out of gear ,
to service at the footstool ? _ that 's _ read wrong !
on wings with omens laden , speak and say,--
where the great wall round china goes ,
ends it with radiance -- as this vision ends .
and so an end . for one day , as i know ,
springing , themselves are changed ; even as the trees
swells all their hearts , and strengthens all their hands .
there i sat this afternoon , but no hand was holding mine ,
but thou shalt recognise i am piccarda ,
poem : the harlot 's house
she reads him when his humbled manhood weeps
but the same demon who was holding parley
there with the glorious general 's name ,
nor to the tyrant did the sight suffice
rise together , one for ever ,
let some hero sing thy praises ,
of white and dancing waters , all besprent
on earth , we give for dower
ruing his power misus'd : for that his son ,
i 'll leave them to their taste , no doubt the best :
now the young men take the fish - net ,
" told him a tale , " clanged the bell of cold abbey ;
is mad upon divisioun
“ ev'n in his grave the anger of this foe .
and against his sharp steel lightnings
all nature understands and sympathises
that i have heard her cry ,
now that her mother 's harsh command
ashy pale my cheeks became . ”
the best he found that band within ,
restless ocean , onward rave ;
infernal noise ! war seemed a civil game
and , under god , whose thunder need we fear ?
until the tossing arms grew still
in dells of forest faun and fay ,
thus lonely , who has crowds and cities seen--
yonder in the sun the merry hares go leaping ,
we only ask to see his face ,
for she 's my winsome wee thing ,
who on the subject will , with furor , rush !
you could not know if you would ;
summer flowers shall cease to blossom ;
por manha da raynha , que inventando
in this sad servitude he long was tried ,
and then the great æneas seem’d to fear :
than any _ young _ couple that ever was married .
the cymrians waver -- shrink -- recoil -- give way ,
seeking thee in vain ,
" lovely world , i now must leave thee ;
i wasna drunk , just fou ye ken ;
el moro que á mí me tiene
i hold me firm in patience , knowing
when in the ecstacy of bliss
health of them who , having left their wives and possessions , have
sought vainly for some gracious way to write
has bound my darling mute .
song - writers , charles mackay holds the first place in general
and then there will be an end of you .
to make thee lap narcissus ' mirror up . "
" and why does death walk everywhere ?
i -- the war - drum of the white man round the world !
how i could paint , were i but back in france ,
( whose nature is elsewhere more clearly shown )
gone away leaving him without supporters ; and this is how
( who dwellest now on breezy english downs ,
that i should no longer stay ;
and windows toward the hill there were none ,
and above the pines and hemlocks
there 's nothing colder than a desolate hearth .
till indian earth he tread . what nobler cause
in the river of manala ,
then give him his own way and will ,
and in the spleen unfolded what it sought .
does not the vision say ,
what rites , what service can be done
their golden knees in the deep sweet clover .
heimlich nur das bächlein schlich ,
roots of juniper updigging ,
outside the palace , neither care nor know
of vision to interpret .   as when breaks
of the celestial which is least exalted .
must do the noble deeds he would have done :
from end to end , o god , thy will
with smiling lips and in your eyes the light ,
" o america , o paramour
far from this dome the lewd devourers cast ,
by the lane or over the hill?--
till julius first recall'd each exiled maid ,
the same low sky would weave its fading blue ,
she would me honey call ,
such a word as " fully . "
i shot the albatross .
who breeding flowers will never breed the same .
the cows upon the lea ,
i do not ask for any crown
snips and snails , and puppy - dogs ' tails ;
no , she ai n't by ' erself in dat .
it is not chaos or death -- it is form , union , plan -- it is eternal
assizes for that county . " see journals of the house of lords , iv .
to the guest - chamber lead him , some one ! give
incessantly on horseback , rambling about the mountain . "
for the female of the species is more deadly than the male .
his helm o’er his white neck flung ;
since first i learnt my a , b , c.
say , what can chloe want?"--she wants a heart .
a nothing that would be something if it could ;
_ llewelyn _ lliaws ei fran fro ,
thus spoke the man and all became silent : restored to good humor ,
by kin upon my bones be judgement made :
“ wrongs such as mine no trivial gift deserve ,
and left no less an ardent flame than i.
be shattered , and her palaces be burned ! "
the wives of troy with scattered hair , bearing the gown refused ,
you have repair'd legitimacy 's crutch ,
quippe amor est igni similis ; flammasque rubentes
though part of the rump yet remain ;
after short pause recomforted , again
and all the stars , that shine so bright ,
and split the hard stone floor like kindling wood .
that wretched man , the volume by whose aid
careless vagabond of the sea ,
turneth toward his goal :
come away , every young neighbor ,
the very worst i ever knew !
so shall we blazon on the shaft we raise,--
when all eye - contentment endeth .
for the stealing of his salmon ,
the stubborn strength of that supreme despair ,
" aslip it came from the further east
the sky above us as with a shroud .
the trojans swift advancing to the wall ,
here is a house hard by ,
the voice of a soul that goeth home ,
ida 's long ridges sighed , sobbed clamorous streams
' tis something quite apart from
for like her limbs thy branches show , —
for words oft give but echo faint
en los signos de sabidos
by her whose lovelorn woe ,
who might have been ... ah , what i dare not think !
for more the pictur'd semblance dries me up ,
our journey was not slacken'd by our talk ,
i felt the world go round .
the high - souled hermit soon they found
in that fair creature whom the fields
will pass into the fire and die .
for ships nor shelters , but jutting headlands and reefs and
what gallant joy his deedes did there revive
perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
my sovereign holds in ward my land ,
to please myself and pass the time ,
and who can tell
and the gineral neghborhood !
imitate the starry quire ,
he turn'd the fierceness of his glittering fires .
from all parts , " answer'd i , " return'd ; an art
obscene to sight , the rueful racer lay ;
when suddenly from far o'erhead
yet are my heart and mind with grief oppress'd ,
and penitent lines consign'd , with eager prayer ,
pendent in hand , which look'd at us and said ,
with most success when all besides decay .
the blue night like a great bell - flower from above
convulsed with passion -- crimsoned with its blood--
for the magic that called her was tapping unseen ,
in the fireplace of the cabin
as when two sweet but shadowy dreams
were nought but bitter mockery .
the sunlight from her cymbals played
but poor to it that of the sun would be,--
faint pearl - glow of evening ,
waylaid and bludgeoned -
in his belt the ancient hero
half virtues and whole vices being combined ;
a steady wind from far descended ,
wher he pourposeth him to fare
who love you , prince , with something of the love
" in the knowledge thou of horses -- vahuca , hast matchless skill ;
flighting , _
the latter , however , still found representatives in the following
real happiness with little gain ,
how he met with his fate and the v.p.p . *
wealth prized in itself no outward value needs :
politely called psora , do you ?
in the host 's office , and the royal chiefs
or rattle off a rondo on the bottom of a pail .
streams undimm'd splendour o'er unmeasured time ;
and grant me life , breath , being for my work .
makes thus forever its mysterious moan
one morn in the valley a bower he found ,
and with his words , and with his hands and signs ,
a pitcher of glass that 's cut , not pressed .
you _ shall _ swim twice , and _ now _ in _ wine _ .
" my father was thinking of something else , however , and one day i
one shriek -- and all was over--
whie then doo foolish men so much despize
and it 's _ wrong _ to look for it without them . "
a lover 's heart , a hand grenado :
and strewed the cakes of salted meal , and poured
observes his heart with some deep woe downweighed .
nor meant to slake oblivion drop by drop .
un silencio de muerte
and dusk of night sank darkling nigh ,
hagen of tronje , / with voice full loud spake he :
" ' t is little luddy - dud in the morning--
where there was royal game .   he knew her now,--
with the tide , but near the shore .
sits close by my side with his head on my knee
and the swords clicked and scraped , and the onsets sped ;
slope , " my master , " said i , " what way shall we take ? " and he to
it drew me nearer,--nearer,--
so while the vessels one by one were speaking ,
like shadows of the morn .
droop with multiple elegance
unyoke your horses , and before them place
for there where god immediately doth govern ,
o sweet , o awful sacrifice !
and many a man his bak hath plied ,
a love which can remove all guilty fear ,
but weepeth so , for wanting of her will ,
shall ward draw contracts with a statesman 's skill ?
and worters him with daily care ,
ikshváku ’s line is blest in thee ,
when wi ' a horse - shoe or a bane
" do n't you wish you were at home , hemson ? " said another .
exchange our harp for that -- who hinders you ?
art thou dead and turned to ashes ,
from beauly 's wild and woodland glens ,
through all the mazes of a faithless world .
and the billows frothed like yeast .
hereafter . and if priam and his sons refuse such fine when
for morvale , now in pity learn'd to melt :
once more the venus of the mounting males .
the holy hermits;--henceforth here
more idly than the summer flies , french tirailleurs rush round ;
love 's a thing , as i do hear , i. 146 .
the stately swan majestic swims ,
no , no , the utmost share
of a dog who heard him foamed his chain ,
toward the prison pool below ,
and with that word she doun on bench him sette .
if ye command .
' go , go ! ' said he , ' but never more return !
he added : but i hold it not in mind ,
the very reverend junipero .
we shall not ever seek to earn
ne haste noght thin oghne sorwe ,
the flight of innocent wings : but since the day
my heart was wounded from his wounded heart ;
base wealth preferring to eternal praise .
revealing . courtenay evidently never met johnson ; indeed , the
ægisthus , on whose head the whole arrear
t ' alarm th ' eternal midnight of the grave ?
my neighbor 's farm and mine lie side by side ,
seven millions stand
ye frigid tribe , on whom i wasted long
' twixt the orbed moon and me
not too far off , when that thou camest by ;
toward the sages , by whose converse cheer'd
if he win me ,
hard sword hilted , and helmet too ,
thy gen'rous woes ! ah gallant injur'd chief ,
and amid the waves be shattered . "
flaked with fierce yellow : so beholding him
in arcadia terrace , no doubt :
if with thee be broken hearts ,
silent the house was now from floor to roof ,
all widowed and forlorn of thee :
of how in the scarlet pools
( the brightest of italian gentlemen ) ,
always blood a - drinkin ' ,
and in the hall itself was such a feast
" behold and guard me now ,
" not so , " said a man .
pushed the rocks from out her pathway ,
at fifty on time 's telegraph .
wrongs inflicted , insults spoken ;
perhaps ( she said ) lest we should die
which knowledge pays is better than great gifts
o wild heart , track the land 's perfume ,
but in her voice , her manner , and her glance ,
sing of her dark - eyed maidens
the trees were grey , with neither arms nor head ;
and honour'd with a portion of their feast ) ,
flew away with lightning - swiftness
wy schalte þou þe{n}ne ask more ?
" who 'll me rely on ?
part of it , dear , is the blue of these violets--
beating upon the gravelled avenue .
whatever doing , what can we suffer more ,
brought on me a fell curse !   o may his soul
the waters murmur as they flow ,
matómela un ballestero ,
and his face was turned to the foe .
that disappoints th ' effect of ev'ry vice ;
an ' to jolly wessel ,
o woven fabric and bright web of sound ,
easiest of doctrines ?
what 's lost forever lorn ;
shall we fly ! there 's another way for us ;
( yet pride , too , had her part , )
" well , god is just , " she murmured , " god is just . "
of cronos may never fulfil ! they are set on slaying
their naked limbs .   many a poor man wondered at the fair flowers
adorned and ready , waiting for her lord !
of william ; and the blood dropped on his breast ;
wilhelm                                 _ patrick r. chalmers _
" what future is't that graves to us reveal ?
how passing strange it seem'd , when i did spy
and i know she is exacting , and she says i am a brute .
had deemed him more disposed to weep than smile .
dispers'd the gloom , and all his wants supplied
then wise telemachus answered him , saying : ' yea now ,
as love 's young dream .
but thou giv'st me little heed -- for i speak to one who knows
thy haughty forehead wore ,
sends forth to heaven great shows of fume ,
and our fix'd empire shall for ever last ;
may i find a woman kind ,
a deathful stillness of decay ;
then , though i drudge through dub and mire
and a hill for me ,
to haunted stream , remote from man , he hied ,
a peg and a smoke in the cool of the night ?
eyes of baby angels playing in the skies .
my heart sad within .
and plaided mountaineer,--
and take in heaven my proper shape .
no , my people are not clean . they do not understand ,
rode the six hundred .
the torches vanished . o , i was glad to see
--that time arriv'd and he was free
" i thank thee , holy father , for thy say ,
those wings are made to fly !
with cadence low and sweet ,
i sign to thet with all my heart,--
and knowing barber twizzle live'd below ,
' tis so ordained ( would fate but mend it ! ) ,
conington , _ miscellaneous writings _ : early roman epic poetry , pp .
to take their pay of sorrow or of mirth ,
a great purple cloak , and took his stand by the huge black hull
for holy thought and fervent rite
in einem luft - ballon ! "
quantum ageret tacitos haec luna modestior ignes ,
and he sometimes goes so little that there 's none of him at all .
with your honours , as with a certain king ,
she said , “ i love for ever . ”
who might have stood aloft and looked ahead ,
but blend all war - like virtues and you get the lordly prussian , "
and sighed and loved as maids will do ;
but she came not -- ah ! and again came not :
loved of little children , oh guard the holy yuletide .
you snare and bind in your enticing arts ,
the rites of nature with thine own !
and lips that close in parching kisses find
how fowlie they their offices abusd ,
a few went out to help the brook ,
thus the waltzers perforce ceased their evolutions ; and there was
the roses are springing ;
gifts will get ye , or the man .
what to do , what course to follow ,
one quiver and murmur under the sun ,
you must prove it , o marcellus ,
the soft recessional of noise and coil ,
to - day when the wind wafts the wavelets
in realms of song . my yearning heart was heal'd .
her bonnet , which once might have been an old hat .
beauty on beauty called us back
but aye she blush'd , and aye she sigh'd ,
sir vivian is the first who moves his horse ,
observant of his vows austere ,
who will direct my troubled mind ;
seem'd taking flight for heaven , without a death ,
and memory shows thine image true .
but the gudewife aye spiers for my muckle meal pock .
and stretched my arm outright , that held the prize .
by our swift arrows falling like the rain ;
on fame ,
with longing more than all since light began ,
anxious to reach that splendid view
we 'll sit within the pleiad ring ,
this way along the hollow of a rock ,
and souls were always more to him than songs .   but still ,
kings and comedians all are mortal found ,
hewn from its bottom by the woodman 's axe ,
by idly waiting for time and tide !
for jesus christ , our saviour , was born on christmas - day .
no sorrow that uprising dims
how often have i paus'd on every charm ,
alike the student and the saint ;
and made answer very gravely :
one morning in july ,
pihlajatar , _ the nymph of the mountain - ash tree _ .
und huldiget der furchtbarn macht ,
lifteth aloft our hearts to an unseen glory beyond her:--
' you taught them love ; love has no end !
is like a song with an accompaniment
estates are landscapes , gazed upon awhile ,
to bathe her finger in eau - de - cologne ;
grey ghost in the mountain world of grey .
o , wae 's me for the time , willie ,
i waited so for that or this--
me deliver it to you . moreover i know well , o priam , and you
thou didst both live and die : now feed thine eyes
sport jocular , or here ; their hearts are light ,
enduring still through day and night
here are great materials for our future history of ireland .
and , prostrate now before achilles laid ,
his heart throbbing close to my own ,
reduce three shillings of the currant price ,
a lightsome eye , a soldier 's mien ,
in this dear patience of my pain
to link it by an age - long chain to those whose lives are through ,
form'd a whole which , irregular in parts ,
put purple grapes or cherries in-
till she freshed to the pink and brown
accessible from earth , one entrance high ;
as new year approaches , she whispers of coaches ,
thy sister ’s son by that jotun slain . ”
sweet looks , and tender sighs ,
who finds in god his all .
went slap for the ghazi , my sword at my side ,
already i see that it never will do :
with the universe ranged at my side .
hath yet one spring unpoison'd , it will be
thei sein , what gold under the toun
and like elijah , mount alive the skies .
crackling with fever , they essay ;
in ryme wate never what it is ,
gracious accents of your own .
i had a little hen , the prettiest ever seen
as he the message pondered / in heart and brooded o'er .
in darkness and alone ;
ture te multo glycerae decoram
and as for your juries--_who _ would not set o'er 'em
weighting their stems , ranged in their brazen pots
another time .
i loved that girl from all i heard of her .
of whom ' tis said : " they need no epitaph . "
as well upon the youthful cavalier ;
but now with your tidal strife do you come again , vain rover ,
i who have known but heaving hues
both thatch and foundation stone ,
they dang wi ' trees , and burst the door ;
how fields are fitly won was then made plain ;
as night grows dark and darker on the hill !
arose at once the sympathetic grief .
the bowl he raised , the bowl he quaff'd :
a while ago ' twas making . so for this ,
in lower pools that see
where his blessed footsteps lay .
with a sudden flare by the sea - ward gate
this pleasing anxious being e'er resign'd ,
" it 'll break up the union , this talk about freedom ,
or you may deem him
a storm encounter from the gloomy south ,
met in christ 's name a church of god do make ;
which only for the worldes good ,
and corners turned — love ’s labour lost ,
now many days , and casual shelter found
i love you , darling , only you !
and said , " i 'll seek their resting - place to - morrow
a goddess born , to share the realms above ,
i then began to plan that night
" in him my faithful friend i view ,
whence wept iphigenia her fair face ,
gavest the boon that makes him bold ,
while joy inspired the youngster proud,--
how the cold creeps as the fire dies at length,--
and yet , alas ! she was dull as the devil ,
their friend the explorer ,
encounter ; curs'd be he ! should he prevail ,
a temple of freedom shall rise instead ,
than the wind 's quiring to the choral sea .
and thousand other signs of purer life ;
with all the dignity of freemen .
oh greeks ! the shame of argos ! arrow - doom'd !
when last we met she was as marble , calm :
billow and breeze , islands and seas ,
the piper 's face fell , and he cried ,
said th ' other , " i am siegfried , thy trusty friend and true ;
now when no mortal living seems to know
and with full brow the musks did take ,
freely on me lying unregarding .
an undevout astronomer is mad .
the wolfsbane i should dread ;
they in the cup sought laughter 's drowned sprite ,
dying embers dimly show it ,
adoptive sonship , and with thee
nuisance nobis , not to ire thee ,
fifteen thousand , come out of france the douce .
she walks in a lonely garden
already you share in the greatness of god .
wise in the council , foremost in the fight ,
when they 're at confirmation !
nor less the stars have round it than its flowers .
breaking its outline , burning shades absorb :
the bright golden crown of the maiden he loved .
out owre a glass o ' whiskey punch
can grin through storms of death and find a gap
" or disregarding people 's civil questions--
that wantons thro ' the flowering thorn :
faintly marked they the words " throw her down ! " rise from night
the ghosts who doubtless here on every side
in bonds to them , i hoped to glean
watching the sunrise ; while on lower boughs
to spread love 's banquet and to name thee host ,
for having purposed change and falsehood , you
forever and forever in the dark !
of hem that so delices taken ;
hence when piccarda uses this expression ,
there reach'd the white arm of a bay ,
thy future is secure ;
tellurem porco , silvanum lacte piabant ;
where are fulfilled all others and my own .
and flares in the wind like a torch ,
of this be sure : though in its womb that flame
hence then it is that my poor breast
so hopes lie silent in the human heart
she sitteth idly at the master 's feet .
great is he , strong , vassalous and nimble ;
ne that a monk , whan he is recchëles
so moving to approach us thereupon
dwelt i upon the shore , ' twixt ebro 's stream
' twere better far , if e'en they fail'd t ' amuse ,
and now she strikes me with an iron rod !
sae charming is my jean .
and the young men played together
crossing the tigris but a span below ,
talking of god knows what , and suddenly
far spreads the laughing sky .
so how many lives has the cat got ?
this day i 'll drown all sorrow :
a funeral , with plumes and lights .
so mony a cumly on v{n}der cambe ,
of gentle comrades that lay
and hear above his scar - worn back
prayer , i have a moment 's hope that i am going to attain
only along the shore of the mournful and misty atlantic
our lives are trailing the sordid dust .
send for philoctetes , who was the possessor of them . troy had
ladies followed his example .
the cross of truth to bear ,
that made them do it : they are wise and honorable ,
a walter too,--with others of our set ,
by silent death surrounded , i
perhaps we do not always sufficiently consider that thought is
gallops down the chase of life .
nestled in dido 's arms and stealthily effaced from her heart all
nears us with a heavy tread ?
to blessed reality .   off in the bay
three fishers went sailing away to the west--
that he was roman .   wherefore with thy sword
with such a living light these dead eyes shine ,
the x and the y it stuck in their gizzards ,
venture forth where men can see thee ,
yon kitchen now emits , which to your sense
and psyche said ' in vain shall be their cry . '
" be all at rest,"--for rest is highest service ;
wine , and another larger one of water ; she also gave him a
how steeped now in the stillness of moonlight are all those pale ,
to the isle of fridolinus ,
to poor clarissa 's throes , thy care succeeds ;
in social ease to pass the day ,
earth could not answer : nor the seas that mourn
between the lines , my lips could touch
' tis better treasure he desires ;
me seem'd as if a cloud had cover'd us ,
filled them with horror and amaze .
by love 's simplicity betrayed ,
unlike the syrian , or sicilia 's king .
such was the house , so furnisht was the hall ,
through pleasant and through cloudy weather ;
and seeks and finds , and doth fulfill the office
cast out of sight of earth and sky
the same umbrageous hollow .
like a leaflet thou wast fluttering ,
he guessed he 'd have to go and get his bottle filled again ,
or seth , as ebbed the life away ,
he slew my knight , to me sae dear ;
habitat ;
the far - fam'd nectar . "   turning to the bards ,
then mounte ! then mounte , brave gallants all ,
but my flag of faith shall be
is not every continent work'd over and over with sour dead ?
when calm the sea , and winds were lull'd asleep
sonnet on mrs . kemble 's reading from shakespeare
of blackest ills , and those immortal too ,
now his friends he can love , had he foes , he could mock them ;
the magic plant thy curious hand invades ;
thy buried pleasures and thy long - past pain .
that the fuss is bothering him .
throughout its round , between the gulf and base
they fret and grumble underneath their chains ;
non tergo minus accipit quieto ,
to asahel a brither .
when one has nothing else to do .
and each , of course , was proud to be a guest ;
knowing , amid the pauses of my pain ,
stude , stood .
" to fear aught grand or luminous .
and the hand of age is cold ;
his buttons were jujubes and chocolate drops ;
are these ignoble relics all that live
from british glory .
when my narcotic spell has wrought
to have no further speech again that day .
" i might have known , " the partridge said ,
to list to our fame ! "
a long , long silence , the electric speeding southward under the
of whom each strives , nor knows for what he strives ,
have i not eaten to the seed
o ' pennyrile er peppermint ,
but scarce could trust my eyes ,
my human soul to win ,
they possess in so eminent a degree , gives them a great
by other aims and by new powers possess'd :
" i rent you from the old red hills and , rending , made you free .
out - stretched his piercèd hands .
( i was n't there : i simply state
and , madlike , shouted out aloud ,
for the lost dream the heart may ache ,
by the crystal waters flowing ,
no muse will i invoke ; for she is fled !
the minstrels found king etzel in his good town of gran .
time to eat my basket - dinner . "
and nocht remained but an infernal smell
o puny , powerless sun !
through stress of grief should give resentment scope ,
but menelaus , hero amber - hair'd ,
as falls upon my ear thy voice ,
that ran to the cave 's mouth .
the feet unmortised from their ankle - bones
from all the lands on earth !
but god ! let me be free ;
the wars of elements and beasts
my little house calls so !
of that good sorrow which to god reweds us ,
peace !   not another word !   pile in !   pile
yet , though thus respected ,
and , though he was longing for rest , none ventured to pause from
pleasant it was , when woods were green ,
i saw the guardian angel sit her down ;
monarchie over such as live by right
those rare and solitarie , these in flocks
“ kyng eolus set hie apon his chare ,
near ascalon go to the salt seaside ,
" ' your mother used to walk here , boy , with me ;
i sigh'd for thee ;
would n't stand sun - heat an ' hard whacks .
that comes of the best knit to the best ? although
that understands the nation ,
from admiration deep , but now admire
( 33 ) theseus , on returning from his successful exploit in crete ,
so still , a hare kept at my side
and its roses all in bloom
now yawn the sombre portals of the fort ;
then comforts him -- that christ aye heaven allows
' i 'll first go out , and steal the beasts some food ,
' quod te per caeli iucundum lumen et auras-- '
the cold quick bids . ( _ against you in the rear ! _ )
sabbata nostra homines , sabbata vestra boves .
these were dame europe ’s deputies ,
and the world runs round and round its track .
" tell me who slew my father ? " cried the boy .
with the same series .   virgin , babe and saint ,
given the audience time to accept the situation . see
are you so unscathed yet as to infer
and stars to set :   but all ,
away from counter , court , or school
hither , o father of the wine - press , come ,
nay , showed his faults -- but when would poets mend ?
then from the trunk came vehement puffs of air ;
found the lodge with arching doorway ,
are bent our lives and goods to save--
ah , if the bud can give such bloom to time ,
a staff in his hand , and a stane in his throat ,
man 's law,--his fellow , ev'n in scorn , to save ,
as softly closed the gloaming ;
and win by wiles his crown of prophecy
" condole , congratulate , invite , praise , scoff .
now knoweth he , how all the ill , deriv'd
save me by hard refusals ; and this strong mercy has been wrought
thou to us be all in all .
as streams their channels deeper wear .
while many remarked , as his manners they saw ,
hath set the world to multeplie ;
and , like the flower , she blush'd a virgin - red .
such day such evening - dew deserves to drink ;
child came to those who looked for his appearing .
but bigot fires would flame as ne'er before ;
i packed up all my traps , and my tackle also ,
moistening the feverish lip , and the aching brow , and in silence
since heaven such precious boons has lent ,
a day did dawn at last ,
" say , what remains when hope is fled ? "
to rest , and what the garden choicest bears
than have my playmates see me cry ;
through the desert bare and dry !
taught that in christ there was but one nature , viz . that of the
and the mighty rhinoceros wallows at will
from tuoni 's fields and pastures ;
grinds a measure fit for eating ,
whose loss were less than irremediable
" and stampt in triumph thro ' our hall ,
sleep pass'd , the waking is a veil more blind :
the sheep are cow'rin ' in the heuch ;
wherof the regnes ben amended .
( though sweeter maybe with its autumn haze ) ,
their eyes flash power ,
spinning on either sole .   i do believe
' if at the ale - house door , with careless glee
have no occasion to urge its acceptance of so - called
as , custom'd in the air ; with breasts upturn'd
' go if you will , ' the squatter said ,
who , moving others , are themselves as stone ,
i sat alone : white - breasted like a star
his rays draw in the circle of the shade .
when man , the glutton , kills the kite . "
to lose the cherished friend .
o'ercome the cruelty that bars me out
_ krishna : _   the night is late , the fair one timorous and fearful :
and withered leaves borne on the gale
pray let us view st . paul 's , it is so near"--
look , are we poor in the land ? judge , are we men of the blood ?
to lay hills plain , fell woods , or valleys fill ,
  " in groves of half distinguish'd light . "--_ib . _
' gainst old truth ) motion number'd out his time
they perceived the dead gentleman must be a saint ,
i need no monument to tell
away they went at a good round pace
the more she thought he spied in her some blemish .
three caskets of gold with golden keys ;
he 's ready to rend you with tooth and with claw .
his outstretch'd arm the lurking thief withheld ,
have they been ruined in my fall ?
‘ in respect to the rhythmical form , i   have endeavored to preserve
it slimes your face with its running nose ,
deliciis me istorum . ]
the moving moon went up the sky ,
with dazzling cheats and dear devices
drags thence her sister;--her thence dragg'd , invests         i
the world reels from beneath me .
and , loving still these quaint old themes ,
morristown became washington 's headquarters , in 1776 - -again , how
thy gates shall yet give way ,
these contraries such unity do hold ,
beatrice upward gaz'd , and i on her ,
the flow of waters now
out of whose depth a fire - fly shakes his light
but she herself would take me safely through them ,
longinge is y - lent me on .
pure taste by right divine ,
and -- earning twenty cents a day !
well if the old man 's heart hath still
and the world began when i was born
our old , spent store , with new fresh fruits .
" what is there in thee , moon ! that thou shouldst move
meditating and reflecting on the world 's hard destiny ,
yon tides with ceaseless swell .
word _ jun _ has a much stronger signification than
ez we 're a sort o ' privateerin ' ,
' tis only inasmuch as she
the tale of sítá ’s fixt despair .
and brace of slaves , the old ship captain tanned
fama fuit iste ricardus . _
me too , o vánars , to the side
to think , thou wert abandoned so by me ,
look ! how his eye delighted watches thine !
" he by the action of his throat seems living ;
of sunset years in calm and peace .
from the rock his steed led forward ,
to crown with glory peleus ’ godlike son ,
they tried their skill in tilting as best they could devise ,
dey roots my cabbage , roots my co'n ;
forever singing the old world 's praise .
some milder joys may come , like thee ,
but hail , thou goddess sage and holy ,
( ne'er shall rudeger 's counsels give you cause to rue ) ,
and stole the saeter - maiden while she slept ,
to chronicle the time , we all have here
the young maid 's eyes , making them beautiful .
weeps by the cocoa - tree ,
" often have i dressd my queen ,
" w'en th ' house comes runnin ' up i 'll yell:--
a fresh young blood and money some ;
lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the
thy perfect praise whom most he would exalt ?
like shadows fall'n on flowers that softly sleep
but go your way , and say to his disciples ,
speaks out the mask o ' his golden casque ,
is writ in moods , and frowns , and wrinkles strange .
with your horse and your hound ,
" come away , come away ,
i 'm glad it was in summertime
and call the vales , and bid them hither cast
what he hath late resolv'd , and with new thoughts
ez fur away ez paris is ;
in the rosy light of my day 's fair morning ,
one stratagem has fail’d , and others will :
unfurled in token that the strife was o'er ,
thus spake the princess : and her servant true
is barred against the pleaders for the poor ;
the other servants pitied him , and rosie said as much ;
his wet fur pressed against me ;
if thou of all the rest wouldst be assur'd ,
the ' eternal might , which , broken and dispers'd
and ahasuerus jenkins is a power in the state .
the inviolate island of the sage and free ,
this heth my faithful shepherd ben ,
but dey bofe can smoke deir daddy 's pipe .
consenteth that they worthily be crowned .
as it drooped o'er the eyes full of mystery there ,
who spoke in answer . “ let it be ,
et liquidi simul ignis ; ut his exordia primis
of big and little a , where are you then ?
i sought the first spring - buds for her , the fairest and the best ,
and yet of social feeling there 's no dearth .
wherever thou shalt see a human face
reel'd , as a footsore ox in crowded ways
then down in peace and innocence he lay ,
original fables ( _ fábulas literarias _ , 1781 ) directed not
let not my lord , the mighty louer
and the key ! never mind , it comes out of a grave ;
as he stood on plymouth hoe .
" the orc , at eve , when to the cave again
like all such dreams of vanisht days ,
atreus ; and nestor , looking first to one and then to another , but
no more of this , then,--let us pray ! ' we have
all - teeming nature , when her plastic hand
were filled with moving , moonlit mists ,
grant heav'n , my guest , that this good word of thine
ere yet you drink your liquor up ;
sir wolfbrand and sir helfrich and eke sir helmnot shed
full twenty beeves , gold paying thee beside
for all your merry ways ;
age , but resentful ; so that the interposition of friends was
his glorious arm the conquest won ,
they whisper _ thoughts _ , perhaps , if not word sounds ,
and that singular anomaly , the lady novelist--
cold , and untouch'd , amid these sacred fires ?
and rubbed his hair to know what words to use :
" madam,"--thus he began with a voice reassured,--
into a savory flood !
but that no doubt was accident , for when
i could n't how d frae laughin ' ;
the mason answered , trouble - torn ,
will little get but cuffs and kicks :
thou shalt search through , and shalt not find a shade
quien honra de la luna las banderas ;
upon the good cheer set before them . now when they had put
immovably suspended , like to those ,
exposed for sale at fairs ,
makes all things mysteries ,
at night he knelt while angels smiled ,
needless to him the tribute we bestow --
splinters of the pictured cover .
shall melt the snaws of age ;
and once upon a wild tempestuous night ,
would that my verse spake clearer
but we know he sheathed his stainless sword
_ gawkie _ , a thoughtless person , and something weak .
when the winged wild whining mystic wheel
wysdom , honour , fredom , and worthinesse . '
but if you fail , or if you rise ,
so dread , so fierce , as venus is to me ;
strike ! for the brave revere the brave !
he said , " because some distant day
we see and hear and do not wonder much :
in the wide aire to make her wandring flight ;
so great , thou'lt find a name -- or ask the world .
with black angered sign talk
the old man , in his simple way , and in his great
truth , for truth 's a weighty matter ,
what would the people think ? i will
of twenty year , withouten any mo ,
in thy dread name we draw the sword ,
h is the hound his master trained ,
in the calm fulness of eternity .
the weariness , the fever , and the fret
marching along vpon soames marshy side ,
o might we never roam
to father austin 's holy cave
oh , where are the heroes of the north ?
" to what wilt thou exalt even kitchen - stuff !
and by a shorter course won heavenly rest ;
then he gave a hitch to his trousers , which
and clym of the clough so fre ,
only blank silences--
a twinge of pain .
nevermore shall a nation lift sword against nation ,
my lord , be moved .   you kill your flesh and blood .
cast oi on that cast oiron !
the gentleness , the grace ,
if you do n't we shall have to eat you ,
he may be evil or good ,
each mile or so , out streaming
tell me , dear damsel , what is your intent ?
yet longed he for the appointed day to fight .
that you should have dominion o'er the springs
to make their new quarters habitable , the fallen angels , under
clenched are these manacled hands that defy
four - and - twenty follicles
comes with all her sparkling train .
to argue at another rate 's
while nigh them , on the grass in giddy whirl ,
then he smiled , and with cordial words address'd him as follows
and lifted up her voice and wept .
if you 'll hear news that 's ill ,
in itself a gem of art ,
through wilderness , and woods of mossed oaks ;
or else , may be , his fancies were
' t is so pretty , in the afternoons of summer ,
agravio con daño cierto ,
full on their brows they knelt to pray ,
as the same light that o'er the level lake
for africa , where camped the christians lie ,
nearest the axle ; when my guide inquir'd :
the titles of the other , as thou sayest .
but now your brow is bald , john ,
so be no more to jealous fears a prey ,
and how quiet willie frae his bed--
der breitmann dook his bilcrim shdaff ,
look ! ere the actor has before the curtain passed .
el que vela en tu alcance y se desvía
" what marvellous words of marvellous love ,
after a little chapel built upon it in 1471 , and dedicated to our
was named the glen of blood ; nor christian feet
nay , nay , do not tell me , 201 .
god being with thee when we know it not .
and thus he spake :   " there was the galling bit .
spice from the printed leaves or pictured faces !
quiet he lies ,
to hit the high spots sometimes , and to let your chances slip ;
seem like the spring - time of the year .
his brazen armour rings against the ground .
that harvest of diviner thought , the stars .
the dog it was that died .
steeps troy in blood , and ranges round the plain :
and therwith - al , ` now , nece , ' quod criseyde ,
incessant gore the liver in his breast ,
as bleakness ' own bleak self ; a mountain stood
to one place i ' the innocent march air ,
and stood the dunce upon the stool ,
where through the lone glade wound our lovers ' way ,
the mocking bird 's record has always been
" for i have seven ships o mine ain ,
and penitential tears .
shall we , like those who rove
oh , no ! we are all , men and women , poor worms
where the widow give the party .
its woe and burthen feel .
and know her friend , and weep for glee ,
blue dream of regret .
passions , with regard to the more confined circle of our friends ,
when chaucer , breaking off some tale
steals softly through the night ,
nor think new england bears the guilt alone ,
a silent , empty school ,
and at last we hardly distinguish
all were agreed , that sights so beautiful
and this first summer month that brings the rose
rain may keep raining and others go roam ,
may buzz so loud -- we scorn them , but they sting . '
little brown thrushes at sunrise in summer
war - glad turanians and aryans ,
here his flock of seals , according to the homeric story .
wolves howling at the doors--
nor sinks nor swells with time or place ;
linked hand in hand they went , tears in their eyes ,
though a man search far and wide , never is hunger satisfied ;
of my proud keel , that singing cuts its way ,
to succour you , and lo ! the awful coils
a man 's live heart might beat
and off he sneaked
be attentive , friend , and while thou still art able , lighten
while naked at her glass the maiden dreams .
crushed , as with bloody spear
we have to grant they 're rather drear , --
( in volumes bound up ) of the royal gazette ,
from some primordial slumber torn ;
o to realize space !
because that denser darkling air behind
that your presence would ever be near me ,
nor ever let him use his wings ;
oft immodest and immoral .
she saw the fiery pennon wave
he roar'd a horrid murder - shout ,
so that the blistering slaver might splash down
whole fleets of ships :
heal me again--
got home at that time unharmed had not the north wind and the
as reward for good      _ gaudia in celo _ ,
ship after ship , the whole night long , with her battle - thunder
a little shoe , a little glove--
at his peril .
and yearns to the breast of the shore ,
should mark , through time , where two immortal shades abide ;
and some men curse , and some men weep ,
the lamp his cheering rays no more illume ,
the people will waken and listen to hear
hiawatha 's gentle mother ,
who to know this abandon all beside ;
i have just to shut my eyes
asking for her lost basil amorously ;
" twice i essayed to pass .
thou say'st i rave;--and _ true _ thou say'st ,
we wuz _ shore-'nough _ laughin ' .
es dios , todo ha de ser verdad entera .
may be considered as a proof that dante was more impartial in the
et tris emenso meritos ex orbe triumphos ,
noble and self - reliant , not afraid
you have struggled and struck and stabbed , you have bartered and
the other strive to gain . "   soon as they heard
shall couch in west . "
thy root is ever in its grave ,
{ 55 }   the old song of percy and douglas , chevy chase in its first
has grown familiar with your song ;
when the lady heard the news , as duty did obleege ,
of manifold life , but has safely conveyed
his head was turned , and so he chewed
think'st thou , kate , to put me down
' n ' dinkum dames who 've made their mark
no power , new - born , springs up within my breast ;
in manufacturing their humble wares ,
thus the nameless fish made answer :
long having lived on your sweet food ,
the trees in the garden rained flowers .
permits not ; to remove thee i am come ,
of our distress , and flew himself to save ;
' o see na ye yon bonny bower ?
and their children fatherless , crying--
white as the sun , fair as the lily ,
nay , i mean nothing :   so then , get you gone ,
that seeing what love must die to see
good - by !   good - by !
boulogne : the buffet
some blow the fires , and off entrails broil .
he wayfared to england ,
undoubtedly admitted for the sake of the answer , which soon
to leo ) " is your soul 's nobility ,
white is his beard as flowers by summer burnt ;
  here he forms the tenses wrong.--wakefield .
year after year she in her sphere did move ,
and own it must , in candour , be confess'd ,
" i 've got it on the fairer sex , "
see ! the smoking bowl before us ,
i am avenged ,
and ears , most ready to believe ,
what female heart can gold despise ?
is crowned above his fellows , yet i see ,
before the farmer as he stooped ,
grant that of yon proud walls not one stone rest on another . "
and ending with some precept deep
but now , alas ! she 's left me ,
to succour thee , thou mayst or seat thee down ,
through the gross vapors , mars grows fiery red
of all thy lofty and ambitious hopes .
cuts a cleaner and wider swarth than any in this town .
ah ! if thou issueless shalt hap to die ,
  bacchus accused her to diana of having lain with theseus in his
god can take -- that i mean you no sort of harm , and am only
till he at last to lunnon went .
place in your hand a cup of wine , upon your back
his majesty has done much . yet , as my friend
eyes the sad heart compels witness of itself among them .
and as a multitude of fowls in flocks
so love 's strong day - star turned to gold
what red blood must be poured ! "
made her prayer :
kyllikki then sought the village ,
neither could menelaus sleep , for he , too , boded ill for the
' i m the best beside the ford .
the french exclaim:--"o wondrous work of god !
ah the merry three !
too fond , too bold , their grandsires ' home .
cock robin got up early ,
o thou who sought our fathers to enslave
the lord of the earth -- of the rivers and trees ,
and trusted he would come .
and set the gold and serpent scales , and did with mighty care
from guarded sleep
er you 'd kind o ' thought the far-
lo ! on the terrace of the topmost tower
come , thou brave man , whom rebels tombstone call ,
hath since elaps'd ) to tell thee . twenty years
of dead leaves stuck together by the heat--
and follered him over to camp ben wade ,
it may be vain illusion .   i 'm content .
' but iron -- cold iron -- shall be master of you all ! '
and tamarisk
in your eyes i see mercy , i 'm sure , ma'am .
might get more room and raise its lofty roofs
at the sign of the billet we all were to meet ,
head of the moslem state , and defender of the faith . _ century
as _ pasaran _ directs i 'd end my life ,
and all their tiny troubles ;
the folk of troye hem - selven so misledden ,
but all our roseate island lay
it spoke , and where rome 's purple ones reposed ,
so man is made , nought ministers delight ,
he 's drinking of my date - juice wine
faces and hearts the same , feelings the same , yearnings the same ,
to the eyes of the famished rebel horde ,
till with a sudden fizz and flare
loving to wind
an incense - breathing cloud around him spread .
might purchase rest for one . "   i thus rejoin'd :
brought from mana 's home the auger .
building a doll - house under the tree !
oh thou token loved of joys now perish'd
she reels along , and by her gait betrays
and every line and texture of the nest
cold and sullen grew the panther ;
for if thine utterance shall offensive be
as oft he rises ' midst the twilight path ,
when my mother died i was very young ,
forever and forever more,--
that glen rock welcomes us to her
the brew'd storm - cloud within him : its flashes scorch'd blind
wandering ' mid the fallen branches .
he had made fast with rivets of gold all round the shield ; this
i followed — lest my heart should break .
let me taste the old immortal
saw thoughts like sinless angels peering through .
it 's safer so .
for oft i watched them in the shade
where the violet sweet reposes ,
ascending by degrees magnificent
is shining in the setting sun ,
to what ende or vnto what conclusyon
to such a deep delight ' twould win me
they 're the funniest thing in the world , i think:--
they are almost old enough to fly ,
obstruction foiled , the adoring air
may the service united ne'er sever ,
ecstasy , imagination , and the unconscious are all convertible and
of inprofytable and vayne prayers vowes
“ here in thy grandson 's age a town shall rise.--
this -- am i well assured -- in open show ,
ah , i then had long been dead !
go therefore , dear offender ! go ! thy judge
in all things one , their power e'en death defies :
forfaulted he suld never be .
was it thus with those , your predecessors ,
if i were up there
at kirk and market to be seen ,
thy skill to poet were , thou scorner of the ground !
" why do they do it ? i dunno , "
and i see you nod your head .
when shortly to her ears the tidings flew .
the serpent , by what means he shall achieve
a white gazelle , but its eyes were dread
for this stubborn little elf
who sits so beautiful at mary 's feet .
belly that shakes with jollity , bright eyes .
for who would court his direst foe ?
reflecting thus , his tail ablaze
kind influence . lo ! they brighten as we gaze ,
is a right strange thing . '
worthy the love a true heart proffers me . "
our wood , that is dearer than all ;
dethroning death and hell .
little use -- having recourse to sketches and hints , the product of
give strength , give thought , give deeds , give pelf ,
i can not choose but ever will
the clang of sabbards , the sharp clash of steel--
but , where the farther side slopes down ,
how came they here ?   what burst of christian hate ,
from the very swamps ran butter .
hyp .   ' t is ovid , is it not ?
if ye had not forgotten so soon .
" come out , you skulking dog , " the boatswain cried ,
and as at dawn across the level mead
' juge not less ye be juged , ' says the good book , and so say
als priveliche as evere he myhte
" ' er pore dear par , " she sez , " ' e kept a store " ;
for whom my golden lyre i strung ,
wit , so loudly vaunted , the smart sayings which swift himself has
scatters before him with his whirlwind sword .
but the airy figures fade ,
ash - heaps smothering troy ;
not ev'n to juliet constance had betray'd
but freedom for the soul to know
and this life too , popes , cardinals and priests ,
grateful mistake ! but soon the sword decides
gives eden to the young ,
how very thankful he would be !
the great heart of a king , and one is fresh ,
it was for her ; and she is gone , o woe !
that basket - bearing children running there
pensive now and quite alone ,
serus enim graecis admovit acumina chartis ;
and there awhile stood gazing down
but hear , o earth , and hear , ye sacred skies !
praeterea ad troiam cum misi ob defendendam graeciam ,
sunk though he be beneath the watery floor ;
shall cheer it never more . ”
with the resplendence of her own , that cast
whose feats so grand adorn our land ,
asked the thrush this simple question :
this way , this way ! ...
concaua , raucisonoque minantur cornua cantu ,
where the big tree spans the roadway like an arch ;
¡ bello es vivir ! vivamos y cantemos :
and light slid up the eastern sky ,
to all that sorrow feel
how are cobweb carpets made ?
and like my manner and my smile
to be an organ grinder , or
" o thou smith , o ilmarinen ,
a horror lived about the tarn , and clave
of shatter'd galleys and of dying men ,
i chatter over stony ways ,
kill thee likewise , unprotected ? "
shines through the nation , manifold :
and overhead the wandering ivy and vine ,
my poor body is alas unworthy :
grey morning came , and at the break of
and the earth iron , shall i not win thro ' all ?
in compliment to dear old van ,
withoutten my command ? "
so each , as firmly fixt to earth she stood ,
even now her beauty shines . they gazed on her
till he wearied of the shouting ;
are lifted , and the long - closed doors
visit once again these borders ,
like the eyes of shy passionate women , look'd down
harry is giving some bread to a poor man .
ye gods , remove this plague from mortal view !
baby , sleep a little longer ,
kail - gullie , a cabbage knife .
the vánars ’ countless multitude ,
more fervent far than by articulate speech .
i hear and understand not , so i see
with such arms of pearly whiteness ,
the lettre schewed rad it is ,
ere now have kings who sought this place
and saw the miser memory , grown gray
wherefore i to the wood will go ,
and feed on stilton till he turns to cheese ,
whence we came .
most holy father ! unto thee
are ended .   i will not again
they bore away for nearest isle .
of her body blest
usual place , and going to take her up after i arose this
" my brother is a king ;
leaving our world ; and the day
they 'll pay no attention to your tears .
of branching elm star - proof ,
little white lily
god led eve forth into the empty world
to live beneath your more habitual sway ;
where death must win ;
and gone to sleep , she need n't wake to answer . "
on second thoughts , i shall not wait for your permission to
the slow sun sinks behind
in hellas and in phthia , for that age
the earliest pipe of half - awakened birds
perish the imperishable fires
what the message did reveal ,
poor alma bell , and three years afterward
the cruelty , o christ , the cruelty !
tydides then with threat'ning gesture cried ,
oblivious to go and make them fair .
leaps forth , and far is borne away down on the hunter 's spear ;
in the forenoon of the day ; and the master 's diligent pencil
some tender moment for soft speeches meet ,
intrenching body and hand and head .
rocks , scyron used to kick the strangers into the sea while so
will you tremble
lest i be sick with seeing ;
and his mercy endureth for ever _ !
when emulation , born with jealous eye ,
to draw his peg - top 's tooth !
and now , as hope reviv'd the brighter flame ,
there from whence now the wain had disappear'd ,
_ we _ fight for truth , _ we _ fight for god--
and with inexpiable spirit
voice ( _ from above _ )
and sleep on my bosom , sleep .
i banged the table on the kettle ,
sherwood now and faintly shaken
next to denmark 's warlike prince
the rolling surge her restless home ,
hasten hither , where i call thee ,
we both become that modest band ,
but , dear , cling close to me ; since you were gone ,
of air , waves sigh'd -- the winds of stealing even
thurgh mishandlinge ben myswreynt ,
_ nobue _     ( " lengthening - branch " )
if e'er her cause require!--
" well may this palace admiration claim ,
of previous kings is also thine :
often forgetful ,
since god is marching on . "
the which is cleped falssemblant ,
and you with holy zeal imbued .
but firme is fixt , and sendeth light from farre
will earn for thee a store of bliss
far from his rage the immortal coursers drove ;
set fire to the house
who by our spears beside the ships have fall'n ,
on such another !
canst thou thine impious plot design
and the sea is pitchy dark !
as from the hollow of a stranded shell ,
delicately like a great
that , hushed in grim repose , expects his evening prey .
but she so handled still the matter ,
or priests adjust the symbols
almost in sight -- for , wilt thou have the truth ?
rockets , roman candles and blue lights clear ,
or fearfully pause to view it ?
began , albeit too near the abbey walls ,
the longing takes me ... and with pain surpassed
and will defend this land , this town , and you ,
the day from night ; and let them be for signs ,
an ' my face are black an ' sooty ;
their present rest ; none worthier i ween !
to duncan no morrow !
now wears the face of peace ; and in the bay
and i am but a novice , yet will hope
" alone to spiran 's huts , across the snow ,
and stretch'd until england it mourn'd ,
is the mystic , meeting the ocean tides ;
along the sea - sands bare and brown .
or the kisses of the sun ,
their sails -- well may they fear it !
oh , see what it cost them , to have their own way ;
bonny sanct johnstonne that stands upon tay .
lest dad should ever see it .   mother 's life
  { ou mentoi soi alkinou ge apologon ero } , plato , rep . 614 b.
state , station , heaven , mankind 's , my own esteem ,
houseless snow .
the far - off thunder of cockaigne ;
out of the hazy atmosphere
they 'll need a place where they can go
the firstlings of his little flock ,
cover of the reeds and thick brushwood that grew about the
each bears my own picked crew ;
he goes to sure death when he goes to his pen .
like the ministering fairy that brings from her bower
optimus , but with patronus . cicero 's readiness to be ' omnium
and the soul of them rose like a presence ,
" o race to death devote ! with stygian shade
dead ! where no darling sips
" how long and dreary is the night "
start and thrill
men are of two kinds , and he
which tells me that my heart is soft ,
" and a glass of bitters , if you please ,
shed by the romans and the lingering war
i am she who adorn'd herself and folded her hair expectantly ,
only , methinks , some loss of habit 's power
that these dead shall not have died in vain ;
methought the distant voices spake
thus as her breast with fury burned
here -- here 's his place , where meteors shoot , clouds form ,
women 's chorus ,
and i looked in the mirror and something said :
nor for a party give his vote :
extravagant conception , to be just :
from wave to wave . it scarce could keep--
and non - resistance ties his white cravat ,
while the living o'er them weep ;
and in a rich enamel'd pinion lye
and would have come often , no doubt , if i 'd asked him ,
i blamed it on the hot spell we 've been having .
some stuff that a greek
all burnt and black , and rent and seam'd ,
so that th ' amazed world shall henceforth finde
and the sweet - brier all abloom .
if so , let my appearance be for you
is scarcely a pactolus ,
" ' o only happy maid of priam 's race ,
nought found she of the gladenswayne
he grinned , and without any further delay
how thou canst aid my venture well .
and blessed the union of his child ,
to the chant of a doleful tune .
young bachelor senator , to get out of the city for
for the heart - strung fiddle
even now i feel the coming light--
thro ' the deep wood where spreads the sylvan oak
wi ' a ' this care and a ' this grief ,
" content , " the host replied--"embrace thy wife ! "
" in every hamlet , every trifling town ,
the welcome of a foe will give . ”
if it is placed within his view ,
kill'd in their tender , happy , holy age--
was conducted to his mother .
turkeys and hens . this business is called " ostrich farming . " the
than bramins , saints , and sages did before .
and spirit of germany have no secrets for you , and your
i write in lallan ,
and one who rode on a dark - brown steed ,
lying there dead in the scattered sawdust ,
“ present her udder to thy hand to press .
stand still to gaze , and gazing , bless the scene ;
swept with him in that snow - flood from the rocks ,
troublesome a task doubles the obligation .
such is manhood 's fiery dower ,
see plastic nature working to this end ,
and then reluctant turn ,
those footmarks , one by one ,
but what 's all this unto a royal test ?
of this kingdom , cloud - hidden from sight ,
from murmuring murias , on cups--
when any misfortune were known for to hard press ,
but , in peculiar , to tiresias vow
the cost of foodstuffs , be it told ,
and the wildest seas that roar ,
that tenuous images from things are sent ,
thy being yet alive this hope denies ;
him sitting in the vestibule he found
' tumblin ' on the sawdust
that we listened to here those long
coal scuttles , recollect ,
hero - son of evil manners ,
no better wish demand . joyful departs
and though you 'll not be seein ' , we 'll be standin ' by
" am i the master of all this ? " asked sylvestre ker .
and all the woods are alive with the murmur and sound of spring ,
pale , in a cloud of white she stands and drinks
but suche as ar voyde of wysdom and counsayle
as one that lived ungrateful for the stay
if the sea miss the river , what matter ?   the sea
and dark were the bosom , and cold and unfeeling ,
how the dear object from the crime remove ,
and brew your bridal ale ;
and peace , and the rude din of jabbering crowds
slow sinks the sunset light ,
( which the language that invalid uses
busily buckling on their armor .
fights not .
ere he crawl'd into bed in his usual fashion ;
which as he scholde finde there ,
silent , the monarch eyes the foreign band
you ca n't find the beat of the cowdung fly !
or turns the tuneless stone and grinds the gleaming scythe .
side by side , for the way was one ,
thither he hied , enamoured of the scene :
“ sir , ” sais syr gawayne ,
lipped over on the yard 's bricked paving .
' twas in december 's mist and gloom .
untouch'd alike by splendour or disgrace
not dalliance , but life !
with a crash and roar of waters
ar ath gar ni fu far fwy .
with urience sway ; but he at camelot
with honger that thes people be slan ,
this grace , by which my mortal through your realm
round stems that never kiss the sun .
our intellect unless the truth illume it ,
throughout all the bounds and borders
' lay waste the district . all the fences burn .
and slave it in an hour .
warm'd with new life , unfolds his larva - form ;
wat famons big stirrins we ’ve he d up i’th ’ taan .
surely in vain , had not the lord of life
this art preposterous renders more unfit ;
be it open ill or hidden good .
on her the fault thou must not lay :
it is not small , your priesthood 's price .
it were a cursed deed !
though ye live twice the space that 's allotted to men ,
and to - morrow is his feast - day .
far feet of failing men ,
the " ribbons " then he 'd gather up , and give his whip a crack ,
and he let them alone , like figures of stone ,
stripped in the silver glimmer of the moon ,
admiration is the wind which fans and feeds his hope . the poems
o , dinna break , my poor auld heart !
and loose the stars to burn up night .
then hurried back in quite a frantic state ,
on acheloüs ' banks , although to stone
the guilty rebel for remission prays .
to ane sae wae and lane ,
divinest of jehovah 's messengers .
she is shut under grass
thy parents ' fond pressure , and love 's honeyed kiss ?
and ride with gorgeous death
didnt know _ what _ to do with 'em , when i had got 'em .
and sweeter than the sweet ambrosial hive ,
as old mrs . vaughan 's or lord liverpool 's .
nullum amans uere , sed identidem omnium
when everyone has happiness but i ! '
thro ' unfrequented wilds i stray ;
and all the wondering world shall hear
those dames and knights of antique days , o'erpower'd
then swift invades the ships , whose beaky prores
green are the sloping fields , and uplands wide ,
help us to be re - sanctified to thee--
and said in tones abrupt , austere--
o north ! give him beauty for rags ,
something friends have told her fills her heart to brimming ,
why do you ask ? '   ' i can not tell . '
yes . thanks for caring . do n't mind will : he 's savage .
thro ' water brilliant as the crystal vase
to lay her sevenfold - carried burden down
as they came oer the dale .
and hail its willow shade .
and nearer , clearer , o'er us , rang the welcome of the bells .
and faith he brings a handsome fee ,
of nitrogen for oxygen :
let no such man be trusted.---- _
the labourers that served under him , he sought to sow the seeds
lat a ' your folly be ;
is this your reed , is this my blisful cas ?
we sometimes feel in dreams , all , sore beset ,
that e'en the air was fear - struck .   a she - wolf
a myrtle garland to inwreathe my brow .
the tapers unto these solemnities ?
head - downward hang on bat - like wings ,
one hundred years ! they soon will leak
let this vain world no more
is but one breath , and what is that but naught ?
other mus .   we are the singers , please your honor .
and just as i wonder who they are ,
but when , at the christmas dawn , they brought
of the stars that shine in heaven ;
though sometimes when old echoes ring too long ,
reporting , etc .
and by the vision spendid
til he himself it wolde seche ,
at this last word , oblivious slumber sweet
be off , for you come here as one abhorred of heaven . ' and with
then again be tried the ointment ,
' i have a sister at the foreign court ,
the tumult in my spirit healing ,
" o ye elect of god , whose penal woes
near to the one their hearts desire ,
simon was old , but his heart it was bold ;
kamper stands on birtingsborough ,
i 'm still floating with the gale !
and there he blasts the trees , and takes the cattle ;
levelled as aloft it twists ,
if ye’ll bud hearken me ;
by the same way returned the well - taught boat
jock keeking round the corner , now ,
he was telling them the story
he fair the chiefs saluted bending with gracious look ;
a line taken by marino , adone , c. cxli . st . 251 .
" i , who at least have forty pounds in cash
trymmav oed am dy adoed di vyrdin . ”
for _ i _ have been there !
" if on de ice it shlip ,
in march the three - an'-twentieth morn ,
those virtues , which , before untried ,
the tumulus -- of whom ? heaven knows ! ' t may be
the scholar 's lamp , the statesman 's scheme , the vaunt ,
thou the first of all the mothers ,
only this i 'll look upon ,
the woodman , speeding home , awhile
that when seven hundred times his course had run ,
drove thro ' the court , and thro ' the echoing porch ;
no cheerful penetrating ray
are scarcely worth the sum delivered now
that each should look on the other again ,
sighing and sobbing away ,
" all who have not since perished must remember as though it were
into the starlight ,
she cooled her dry lips in the bubbling stream ,
for he was half man and half beste ,
nor think that thou in this my book art worst ,
some one poor almshouse ; there to lie , or stir
when vile martano from his place discerned
yet such a great philosopher should know ,
yet i found
with wide gray eyes still reading the blank air ,
what so me schal betide of love .
wants dat rooster fer deir beau .
what though my name stood rubric on the walls ,
whizzing o'er parapets sifted and glistened
tears to amend .
plerumq ; falsis nominibus placent
by mildest means it was his aim
with tears and prayers the holy exile strove
the judge looked back as he climbed the hill ,
but go , deceiver ! go,--
his helmet here undid the weary count ,
when first she heads thee from the starting - place
the falcon loves to feed on doves
what life and treasure toucheth / shalt thou my protector be . "
the dark - eyed maiden and the ass
yet would i love her till i die .
had he the offer of ;
--let the wingéd fancy roam !
and is al war of " hadde i wist":-
virg . aen . ii .
no -- had not reason 's light totally set ,
" i had a dirty cloak once on my arm ;
within the solemn woods of ash deep - crimsoned ,
martin started up from his nap . " who 's there ? "
let the porch bend , the pillars bow ,
of the master of the northland ,
how does thy loss o'erwhelm my heart with grief !
so did i plan it all out in my mind while driving you hither . "
full counsel must mature : peace is despaird ,
sends you back the hopeful hail:-
and send her birds no more .
she smites with pangs of worse than brute .
and i shall sleep in your arms to - night
eighteen - pence if the bottles are returned .
" some speak of alexander ,
turned her back upon the east - wind ,
the griding sword with discontinuous wound
that burneth in this house of clay ,
about her life , and from the first saw all that was to be ;
he dashed the rowel into his horse ,
sorrowful peace !
flash silver where the head - light gleams ,
his soul has in its autumn , when his wings
that e'er hath stood in budding wood
the happy angels sing,--
of my distress by sea ) the dreary deep ;
and hoped protection they might lend ,
in every temple crowds shall kneel again
or the moon glimmer soft through the fast falling snow .
on glittering parallels the dingy cylinders
as if to e'en the sleepers there
too blest , if it tells me that , mid the gay cheer
sleeps like the daring sap and flood
thee off from thy kingdom and drive thee into exile without
- his singing - mistress verily was no other
that nothing is happening just now ,
now we found and forge the steel ,
a lady so richly clad as she--
by climbing slow ,
--to live the simple life .
to make that life , and call it me ;
six thousand five hundred and twenty - five volumes . . . .
stood between the poor and power ;
didst thou for this thine early banquet make ,
newport , to consist of the cells of these animals . ]
and so i passed her by and had my day ,
that day the stroke of fate , when me the dead
he thought of the visage his dream revealed ,
and not that nature is corrupt in you .
haunted the dreamy sky of the soft venetian december,--
so stilly was the time , so sweet ,
down the himalayas:--
till the jeering crow and the saucy linnet
she saved her head , and with her axe well steeled
doubled the darkness of her eyes with surma
et c'est alors un pays d'ailes
i gave myself up for lost then , and i cursed in my wild despair ,
but various colors wear .
on the rough edge of battle ere it joined ,
so in fantastic height , in coxcomb exaltation ,
had he to shield his life from harm .
jealous fears my bosom move .
primroses now awake
zeus . and we avow us to be the men of agamemnon , son of
a child who with a magnet play'd ,
that you 're sorter out of place
this crown shall crown their struggle and their ruth ?
but look ! along the wide - branched , dewy glade
or taint integrity :   but all obeyed
with thy long levelled rule of streaming light ,
drawn out before him , while that he
off at sea ; or the manifest , and odoriferous wafts which flow
when lo , the herd falls bellowing , and with its sorrow fills
as _ à propos _ of hope or retrospection ,
in dreamy silence .   helen 's dark - blue eyes ,
god be thy leader : justice be thy sword !
where wild waves sing .
were children . we could fling taunts without end at one another ;
derry down , etc .
achievement brings achievement , friends bring friends--
painted by raphael , he seemed .
where airs are soft and waters sing ,
and had no other gem nor wealth
and all god made of me .   a man to die
as once sent forth , in straight directions all ;
rain , nor doth the snow come nigh thereto , but most clear
the path i have unfolded ,
or that , or man , inevitably lost :
outstretched in death he lay ,
the son of venus ' dardan son , scared through the meadows fly
whose plaster crumbles at the alley 's end ,
the goddess.--“dearest galatea ! speak ;
where princeton calls to magdalen , tower to tower ,
to her who must tell it ,
it mot be seid al prively ,
the doublet , when she saw the goodly raiment that she
all is life -- all animation :
deep double shells wherethrough the eye - flower peers ,
i see with eyes open and smile , and behold his beauty everywhere :
of union absolute , which , many a time ,
convey to this desolate shore
a debauch of smuggled whisky ,
so , take and use thy work :
may soothe afflicted love .
in massy hoariness ; the ruined wall
allows . in the _ progress of poesy _ , i. 1 , we have again : " the
the sight , and to her sister 's face reverts
down the dark pages runs this stain ,
con elástica fuerza
ere the day - star seeks the ocean !
but more of that anon -- all things arrang'd ;
of shadows o'er the landscape trailing ,
i build myself , not as i may , but must ,
penned round some market town in villages ,
it was her best , and she was vauntie .
be over , and the sun more cool decline .
they cast the ring , drawn from her hand :
i would see to it that this grove should be utterly forgotten .
a lady less
the grass my table - cloth , in open - air ,
' our orders are to fall in every morn ,
its motion by no flight of wing is equalled .
why stand we longer shivering under fears ,
and fear that we its freight may waste
the pity which was then in every heart
and had also paid the land - dues ,
frank , haughty , rash,--the rupert of debate ;
the kiss of snow and rain ; the star
with its fog , to screen the harbor ;
mute stood his statue ' mid the noisy cars .
clean cast from perfection 's brain ,
when christmas comes about again ,
through it the world - soul sends
but , ere it crept upon him , he had prest
o'er the last mandate wept the indian 's eyes ;
carol singing in the streets by children is illegal , and morally
shrinkes , as the sick moon from the wholsome morn .
the varied realms of fair menteith .
raised o'er him a tomb ,
for the sweet fruit i go , that a sure guide
neud arfeu doniau , goddau gwedi ,
to curse some other destined land .
one from the east , one from the west ; their skulls
syne haud anither waddin ' wi '
" then let 's bolt ! "   in tone emphatic ,
anon she wisht yong _ pyramus _ was neere ,
in thee concentring all thir precious beams
rustling about its feet .
if he hap to fall , his fall can nat be soft
on his granite lightly pour
shine through my hopeless tears . my drooping sails
but thou art twice as fast as he ;
if ever thou gavest hosen and shoon ,
fair dispenser of its treasures ,
a lighted handful of oil - soaked waste .
betwen hire hih astat and me
he waits the look - out 's signal cry
and those who are close - bound in love to part .
thus by creation 's law controll'd
" holy - cross day " reflects the attitude of the corrupt mediaeval
the arm of vengeance , strong , divine :
on the grass her shoes of deer - skin ,
sad and shrill,--"_whippoorwill ! _ "
who never had a foot of land till now,--
the tones that thrilled the shepherd men :
but , to match these , thou hast the people 's love ?
beneath his cares thy early youth was train’d ,
( oh ! the moon - memories , vague and strange and dear . )
and sawing wood at amerongen all
they coaxed and besought , and they sullenly said
oh , genius ! thy patrons , more cruel than they ,
found great delight in drinking the sweet draught , and
the grey water . for without are sharp crags , and round them
once in the woods she had heard a shepherd ,
de tantos que por falta de sustento
and he abhors the jest by which he shines .
though lusty roger there had been ,
then forward , boys , forward , to battle ,
so fond they look on her .
as though , swift - dancing after ,
i will return to you
old mother duck has hatched a brood
and tripods twelve , wherein thine heart may joy
to hear the warbling of my youthful muse ;
and turn and go up to the open door boldly ,
in some fair land of youth and love -- some land
and when they water'd were and gone , the breeze
orders a feast in his favorite room--
the fisher 's widow            arthur symons
son of tapio of forests ,
i 'm almost afraid my method is wrong . )
then he raised her aloft -- but to shorten our tale ,
to him who may companion with you be ;
far in the east boadicea , standing loftily charioted ,
but nobody could hit upon a practicable plan !
to sweep with a bird 's free motion
much wealth is corpulence , if not disease ;
and called bare - headed on his folk , with eager shouted word :
i have , no doubt , instill'd into thy mind ,
ben seid the patriarkes tuelve ;
deceiving works more shame than torturing doth .
and i 'm ' ere in a pit
come , and we will feast and sing ,
it seemed one polished stone of sanguine dye .
knowing not who thou wert , till the touch of thy
still is there sympathy can bring
it may be the sole flower of thy life ,
of a magnificent castle we arriv'd ,
pluck out the flower , however fair ,
some homely idyl of my native north ,
to none that ask denied--
well , well,--we have garnered all our sheaves ,
to offend ; discountenanced both , and discomposed ;
rather it is the sizing moon .
whereon i to rejoin him was not slow ;
and who should be my playmates but the adder and the frog ,
wha represent our brughs an ' shires ,
for so the holy sages once did sing
what hope deludes , what promise cheers ,
he gayly sprang aboard the bark .
flowing away ,
silence and solitude , the soul 's best friends ,
she whiles did smile , she whiles did greet ;
nor forests sounding like the sea ,
speeding their business ere the heat of day .
weill ribband with renowne ,
the lapland drum delights to hear ,
seven men from all the world , back to town again ,
and entered , and were lost behind the walls .
we 'd kept up all these years between ourselves
then see them broke with toils , or sunk in ease ,
where the thistle and heather are bonnie and blown ;
received the falling showers and gathered store
theirs , that serene , the sages sought in vain :
above the valleys , shadowed deep ,
shall i , wasting in despair ,
nor to rogero lean the men alone ;
  the thracians say that the nightingales which build their nests
can not perceive : that bounding point indeed
saxosas inter decurrunt flumina valles .
i am a beast until i love as god doth love .
and crowds with sorrow saw their love repuls'd .
still through the ivy flits the bee
how chearefully thou lookest from above ,
but the maiden 's soul was , unhappily , troubled already
i remember one thrust he gave to his hat ,
then all together , when the signal came ,
let none shoot up that nigh them planted be .
where the starv'd sinners pine . '   if thou be ask'd
unanimous , as sons of one great sire
but shall no gift be made ?
" oh darkness come and end my woes . "
the peewits wambling in the dark
and impressive limousines , and brisk little ' lectrics .
end . ' on this i woke , and when i looked out i saw my geese at
when phoebus shared his alternating reign
the day is lost ? what then ?
to rávaṇ , ravener of man ,
and named them one and all .
still for dominion haughty louis pants--
' his heaving throat proves him of living folk .
we 've gone beyond the funkin ' , 'cause we 've found it does n't pay ,
the enamour'd god for young dione glows ;
remplir les sublimes concerts
of evening shadows and the rill !
the unsleeping city murmur like a shell ;
i will whisper to your ears :
at saint praxed 's church     robert browning
‘ and this lesson we shall lere ;
.     .     .     .     .
her lot let me share ,
some late lark singing ,
" the boys in this town 's down on you ! " said
sailing henceforth to every land , to every sea , )
will you take me too ?
where the cliffs arise from water .
with dreamy eyes watching the ripples play ,
his hordes to fall upon thee . he shall send
with extreme sad delight .
vii   how the son of achilles was brought to the war
so forto kepe rihtwisnesse .
nay not so much as out of bed ,
or , disdaining his divine gift and art ,
more proudly happy thus to glide
' tis an unruly and a hard - mouth'd horse ,
it chronicles took place .
therefore waxed he both pale and lean ,
and in a voyage to portugal
bent or recumbent in secluded stalls .
on thy remembrances of evil yet
was elenor murray 's mother , then she willed
for that they were elephants , who can believe ?
if from their influence we may judge ,
but every one allows
dulce rideat ad patrem _ , & c.
a ray of truth through error gleaming ,
we plant the spire that out - towers the crag ,
and within , in the house beleaguered , slumbered the forty score .
the earth is his joy ; his joy is the sky ;
through riven helm and hauberk rent ,
sé que en fuerte ora allá echamos
but the cry still pierced my prison - gate ,
when we met and knew in our souls that we loved one another .
iapis cries , and , foremost to upbraid ,
blasted my gourds and laid them low .
out of the travail and burdens we know ,
' twas but a day he had been caught ;
of elenor murray carry beauty forth ,
drawn at a gryphon 's neck ; and he above
it is the man of mirth .
may set them down and rest .
an ' syne , to weet the bairnie 's heid
inquisitorial ways
than warrior 's steel - wrought jerkin .
he _ may _ be true . yet , daisy dear ,
my deeds , though manifold ,
" o prince , what mean'st thou ? " in his fright
to - day i met him where white lilies gleam ;
bring to him next , and in it show
and care for children of the poor whose mothers
" i hold a man should woo and we d
which done , no more
then , for a moment , silence froze their veins ,
his business in great waters . there 's no room ,
my hawk is tired of perch and hood , vol . i. , 298 .
whose curving blossoms strew the glimmering grass
did not the post - boy watch his goods , and swear
i d quod nostri caelum memorant , grai perhibent aethera :
whatever 's the meaning of that .
how time is slipping underneath our feet :
surveying , here and there , the whole at ease ;
sings as she skips ,
in doubt , expecting some great evil near ;
¡ ay , qué terrible armonía ,
counsel , if of thyself thou find'st it not ! "
where the false notes that ring for the last time ,
and now before mine eyes expands the ocean
some soul is passing over . )
thou grace divine , encircling all , 164 .
" this is he for whom we suffer !
was the only escaping way . . .
through autumn ’s star - lit firmament .
sharp fever drains the reeky moistness out ,
i pray thee by thy love be wise
the crecian pend , " it is a rather eqivocal compliment .
o , brave are the haughs o ' baile - liosan ,
but maggie stood right sair astonish'd ,
she ’s a blessing to her nation ,
off shot the spectre - bark .
as nágas guard their home below.(69 )
as far as here on earth is counted for a mile , so far had we now
class iii .
and makes a convert of my guilty song .
mute lamentations and unnoted praise .
what pleaseth god .
and heaven , ah ! heaven will be so bright
yeller , _ yellow _ .
journeys one day , then a second ,
to love his fellow - creatures dear ;
that i may try if all be true you say .
with better auspice than her ancient tow'rs ,
until he saw those young eyes , quietly smiling ,
" snakes ? " i said down below .
her full black ringlets downward roll'd ,
then dreams came by , of the gladsome
as silver cynthia phosphor bright outshines ;
nigh half whereof he owned , made edmund drake
hence , treasure to their country flows
and your voice pleasant .
oh that , in tears from my rocky prison streaming ,
that holds the blood of love ,
comes in from melos , rippling all its floor :
had so adorned her laws ; but soon the times ,
_ our highway none knoweth ,
if there 's luck anywhere , there is luck at luckeen !
the wisest , and the loveliest.--
" but he gets nae meat , unless ye rin
i feel so queer each time i hear
then all the mighty floods were out .
on ida : never helen saw him more .
that incipient old man at a casement .
alas ! not all the blood of all the howards .
the father , with his consort ’s aid ,
and to himself lives free ,
who will care for the puk - wudjies ?
so in their arms and vigour confident
in your high bed !
fashion { 159 } as he did so , and it hit the wall , not him . on
life and glory euerlasting . who liuest and reignest
then into a cheerful place they went , where were many groups of
till to her pristine task she do return
stained with blood the tuft of feathers
borne upon the night - wind chilly ,
for you in singing martial facts excel ;
thus is thy name verified .
the snowy maiden , pure and mild ,
by holy human law , and common troth ,
for inspiration 's sudden spell
stood the lodge of pau - puk - keewis .
on all their hallow'd altars to the gods ,
despatched his balearic and light - armed troops round through the
not yet within those chambers lieth he ,
and sought a solitude forlorn ,
though cloakmen , that seem much precise ,
follow me , as i sing
they listen to hear the great bat cry ,
nor he , who only on his wife relies ,
it had been the greatest fight
nor from his side my leader set me down ,
dentro del hueco de sus tumbas frías ,
forth , with " wehee ! " through thick and eke through thin .
presents , such image did these make here . and as in such
heeding not his brother 's warning ,
by frequent tracing , as a lover learns
she does not even know she was a fool ,
we asked her why .
gars me moop wi ' the servant hizzie ,
the object of poetry is confessedly to act upon the emotions ; and
and yet the peace i gave them you have presum'd to break ,
for him who conquered in the right ,
by the profusion of the east ,
gave to him , and he poured and said , " o thou ,
on the next bush , and looks
now crystal clear are the falling waters ,
coils and shatters at her heels ;
of defenders and aggressors ;
where changeful proteus leads his scaly train ;
sent to keep young and bright the joys
let beauty awake in the morn from beautiful dreams
with a far signal in our secret speaking
who for her favour oft had sued ,
but ( for he thither with marphisa came
  two pairs of sisters , and , of the four , ismene , sister of
que della me pueda agora defender ,
see ! from the world what profit have i gained ?
i 'll put a toadstool in . "
tracing its white flight
" alas ! by what sweet thoughts , what fond desire
yes , good scotch yarn is far before
o little elves , so white she lieth ,
grant that she tread the path which leads
age like winter bare :
no soul shall tell nor lip shall number
pindar , translations from , 375 .
thus entreats the god of thunder :
the garden will be hushed with snow , forgotten soon , forgotten--
by happy nearness to yourself , grow sweet .
" god 's finger touch'd him , and he slept . "
as thus the boy did often times resort
a blemish in the cut appears ;
calls to its sunburned chivalry ,
but others from her hundred cities crete
i may cog and flatter , so may you ;
exulted .   nay , thou get thee back : return
how well i know
thou slewest the child , oh why
and god 's great purpose humbly serve .
heaven opened , and in likeness of a dove
will , that among the troops thou hast to guide ,
where never waves by storm were driven ,
told them their time had come ,
from those two maiden sisters pull the spleen :
yet choose thyself a faculty !
hanúmán from afar beheld
and the solemn bells hung nigh it
hadst not been driven forth ; for in my mind
compared , half - reas'ning elephant , with thine !
never again .
and on earth astraeas shine ;
the owners of the mine .
i 'd deem him present ,
i am left alone at seven ,
nor had he where to rest his head .
men scoff at apes : apes scoff at them ;
why tarries not her chariot wheel ,
and from all the bachelors two .
that change like a dream ?
owe their poor adjuncts to -- ten grecian robes
he cracked brazil nuts with his teeth .
' till the bride and the bridegroom i see . '
he sees the firmament all calm and clear ,
while , where thou bid'st , the honey'd blow
before the sages , and drink wine ; for , whether you drink
he 'd heard that din on the horizon 's edge
could have grave friendships with wise trees and flowers ,
o'erwrit alike , without , within ,
say , wilt thou remember us , while thou dost live ,
whence thy tongue cracks , witness the fluid mound ,
when the shadow of night 's wings
or indolent , to each extreme they fall ,
" his academic career was not a success . "   ' oliver
lay up the grain for times of want ,
your wife -- she does n't want you to . we do n't ,
pursuing , o'er the ground , that on all sides
promisi gregibus pascua plena meis
out among the daisies
whereof you drink , who drain and toss the cup
highte this clerk , whose rhetoric so sweet
in speeches heard at any public meeting .
do men praise the labour?--gladden'd
all that such love deserved in the heart and the life
" lift up thy head , and make thyself assured ;
in a few hours more ,
let some coy maid
and the apparition 's fear . '
" why did i ever let him leave this house ! "
there are captains and sea - captains , and weeds and sea - weeds , and
when she cam to the netherbow port ,
should fortune 's smile attend me thither ,
not from her paths and gentle precepture
the thatch is slate , the plaster bricks ,
the fields , the tents , the navy , and the bay .
from me : i gazed ( as oft i have gazed the same )
he spoke , and raghu ’s son who knew
glory ere death ! when his days are told ,
has crumbled into the dust ;
who lay , promiscuous , by achilles slain :
to lie before us like a land of dreams ,
she died in beauty , like a rose , vol . iv . , 177 .
down on his wasted fingers rain'd .
or hear the grown - up people 's feet
the hatred flies my mind ,
as if he saw heaven there .
with vehement strengths that foam and over - brim ,
but as the line divides the plank aright ,
lost are we and are only so far punished ,
now too the soul of all his senses felt
headed a rebellion in hungary in 1513 . the former was proclaimed
and when they are found , you must not beg for pennies .
but , o what a pity ! her frock was so soiled ,
today the trains go whizzing through
i even have beheld him leagued with murther .
have faculty by nature to subsist ;
the ruffian breathing yet on argive ground ;
to kiss the cheek of rosy hue:--
a little matter ; yea , and for my part
even the beauteous must die ! this vanquishes men and immortals ;
pardon his offences ; i the pain
undaunted struggling for the right ,
( which is but how tanacro to offend )
dot vos a schwartz zigeuner
and pallas ever - pure , was she ,
accumulation of importance given to the barbarous antecedents and
_ i_'ll not fight with the powers of air ,
who doubts all doubt , and takes the soul on trust .
of the land of danes , but lustily murders ,
i to my leader 's side adher'd , mine eyes
he came ,
i give ; the blade is thracian , and of late
i saw a village - maid , almost a child ,
his gaucie tail , wi ' upward curl ,
if thou but newly art arriv'd below .
these eyes shall fondly gaze on thee
where cavil grows on contradiction !
and knit around his forehead high :
branches fling their shadows on the grass - grown path .
related by the poet , is a moral tale , which shows the merit of
how thou hast seen me , and this ban beside ,
relation to the latin royal poems . g.
where his last words , as at parting , he threw
and , see , revenge but threats to bless thine own !
keep yet my secret in thy breast here ;
curls over them the amorous sea .
the lightnings flash from pole to pole ;
sure of that ! but isaac thy son , the young child who
the gunner was bustling the shot racks to fill ,
perhaps i 'd like it -- for awhile -- to hear th ' songs an '
of the women 's feet should touch the ground ; and as thrushes or
i have physicians famed for skill ,
alas ! my sweetness is a little drop ;
ilmarinen , magic artist ,
may men meet men of knightlier worth
secure were then forever / the thane full valiant and good . "
{ by himself         himself      }
to ráma who had thither strayed ,
there was an old person of cassel ,
from her tongue to throat it glided ,
love,--whose forgetfulness is beauty 's death ,
uncovering of the future state , which in some form belongs to all
vines interlacing !
while kneeling thus , before the sacred shrine ,
from erin , from erin , the cotter shall bring ,
mas un hombre á él venía
wi ' spreckled breast ,
¡ adiós por la vez última ,
i see the curious rapid change of the light and shade ,
' far more alone than i have ever been
or stricken woodlands patient in decay ,
all blooming on the lawn the nymphs advance ,
silenus - like , eyes stolidly
system , which are in health excited into perpetual action ,
enough to fill handsomely two volumes , _ oct _ . ,
with love that holds in one
he scans me with a fearless eye ;
to incense the head once more ; till on a day
cities and realms by thee ! thou with thyself
who wants to be deliver'd ? let me know . "
but his strong helm , of mighty cost ,
ah -- was that music only dreamed
the first foe in the field ;
these sombre cedars , this intense still sky ,
yet he came not , and the stillness
could write rhymes , and compose more than she wrote ,
i clasp thy knees , ulysses ! oh respect
six miles , and more , with nimble foot
many shall thy being pass--
of dalliance . what sufficient cause , what need
" the saracen 's head "
of palmy palestine ,
how long , o lord , before thy wrath shall reap
“ is with new figures printed , nor remains
at the hot stones and still sea 's blaze :
wrongs himself more , and ever bears about
in mourning weeds , from out the western gate ,
o'er rocks , and crags ; through rugged paths , and ways
swerve not from battle : faithful , loyal , glad--
gently , more gently still , cradle my head in your
but she looks across the valley , where her mother 's
that every man was faste aslepe ,
and there let it lie , growing fonder and , fonder--
less doubtful , as that worthy shade complied .
upon some cliff reclin'd , beneath him sees
make weak - made women tenants to their shame .
when nature gave
as in that holiest night
warble th ' unmeaning hymn in folly 's ear ;
for theyr fathers faute they suffred punysshement
he hoped he 'd get his leave extended .
passionate soul ! light holds he a mother 's tearful entreaties ,
and willie 's brother kent ,
for i will have contention put to shame ,
no man with the half of 'em e'er went far wrong ;
there is none highest and none lowest :
oh ! thou art gone ! and would , with thee ,
and gain a humble but a separate tomb .
and he knows she will perish at last ,
which opened , in the strength of god ,
supplanted all the rest .
lord dunmore 's petition , ii . 114 ;
should our nation call in her peril
what merchandise ?   whence , whither , and for whom ?
crushing the grim ones . grendel now ,
and i can not help feeling indignant ,
the great artist . " *   by copious quotations lanier then shows
when he kissed a flower he took ,
just let me end my tale and i am done .
carry her ventures to success , but always
saw the signs of bad - luck lower ;
and , rul'd by me , o'er - rules mankind . '
whose fount was deep and clear .
gie me ae spark o ' nature 's fire !
and sam . clark as follows :
o'er the hills to sariola ! "
“ not yet convinced ? this clear assay
and i gave my whole life to his keeping .
no longer mourn for me when i am dead
whence she to me : " in those desires of mine
hence i make war on all the human race ;
for ther be lustes overal
that seems to mourn for the expiring day :
loose , with your singing , captives such as these
he started , shook his sides , and woke ;
in this affair . who has the box 's key ?
so brave a shot , dear fire , and beauty strange ,
unworthy as i am , that thou attempt'st
hoisting of her topsails when she sailed so proud .
breathe forth once more those tones sublime
strew silently the fruitful seed ,
and straight began , though mix'd with doubts and fears ,
" wherefore are the women laughing ,
skipping through a grove of lindens ,
you ask
and now tho ' i must beg ,
i 've never seen her -- nay , not i ;
for him is charged with hopes and fears ,
no , ' tis replied , he acts by gen'ral laws .
thou writes in prose how sweet all virgins be ;
whose floor is woven with the iris bright ,
and the stars are quite gone ,
for well he knew his vessel
let me greet you lip to lip ,
his pinions drooped , he could hardly stand ,
to riche and poure ay fressħ & wel beseyn
.... well i recall how she explained to me
upon the rounded cheek , which tells
but i 'm gettin ' on , i guess .
a bumper i drain , and with might and main
of living sons around her , to succeed
out from the earth , by sudden rupture rent ,
of mortal pain , and chemistry 's fixed laws ;
hast thou forgotten how in former times
and willing in assent ....
scents from altars hoar go up .
my essence ? what serener palaces ,
who longs to sever from the tender neck ,
startling the heart with the fond dreams of yore .
pleasing reflections on parts well sustain'd ,
the young pharsalians did not disarray
then , only then can heaven decree ,
i will not argue that , nor will repine .
the grass , the thirsty trees ,
peace shall thatch the roof and love shall latch the door--
we cherish that great sower 's fame ,
" poor crystal sky with stars astray !
or of the soure or of the swete .
the sun has got as far
to groan beneath the carrier 's load ?
i answered him , " have love revealed to me ;
as thou shalt deign to tell thy mournful tale !
der hauptmann naht mit stolzem sinn ,
was a braid of nut - brown hair .
“ o she was born in lucky tide ,
she liked quick answers in all conversations ;
that the pupils of the imã¡m mowaffak will attain to fortune .
again when the devoted mother of the reckless hero , lemminkainen ,
rehearsed impromptu agonies .
unscorned , uninjured ; for the good and great
near the rough falls of inversneyd !
that baby may rise !
ca n't you jus for one minute go little bit slow ?
and the cannibal feasts upon bad - boy pie .
with a prayer on your lips for the goal--
they dreaded what they knew ;
their purpose -- then did he divide ,
pennies plentiful as pebbles . "
and on this holy mount mourn for the days of yore ,
pleased with their hecatomb 's ascending fires ;
for in this nether world i will not leave thee . "
that aside i always threw ,
and caught the fire in tinder - leaves , and never gift did stint
when our need was the sorest .
to all whose idiocy is chronic .
while one young , dark - eyed amazon ,
whose wanton passions in the sacred porch
in notes of sweetest melody
montaigne , a communicative old gascon , 427 .
on either side , the least of whom could wield
and , ' midst the feuds of monarchs , mocks with fright
if with knife it is not severed ,
singing down - adown - derry .
for he will never come home , he has all that he could need
and open in a thousand buds , and blow .
thy haughty soul unmoved would feel them all ;
the artist trembles o'er his plan
where heather blooms an ' muircocks craw ,
than gladness that to - morrow
or , bent in pencils by the lens , convey
as little sparkles shine more bright
and thus the lofty lady spake--
then , for the bright creations of the brain ,
soiled with the battle 's stain , and worn
and found what she had sought ;
sin disclaims and i resign .
in a minute ;
the vánars whom the giants slew
made a torch to light them as they wander ,
loud and chill blew the westlin wind ,
wherefrom the last stone breaks itself asunder .
you can not see her , anyhow ;
of the cumberland , for heavy rains had fallen
nor knew the gulf between :
" sir , there are hints and hints ! do you _ mean _ more ? "
then westward aiming on the unfathom'd deep
firm stood rogero , and the veil undone ,
" i dreamt thou'dst ne'er return . "
meantime all forward drew : me terror seiz'd
his witness here am i , because
agmen iners ; queis mos aliena vivere quadra , { 149b }
seven times astolpho makes them wash the knight ;
and waves in ether his unnumber'd hands ;
was wounded with the pitiless bronze , as he turned round and
on a bridge , catching her breath ,
the same ambition can destroy or save ,
then anasúyá at the call
through mists of tears ;
afternoon .
to draw his sword , the dreid of faes ,
where awful arches make a noon - day night ,
too weak am i , dear lord , to bear
how i , in lonely nights , should lie awake ,
her majesty 's tower 4 v.
  _ geometra chærophyllata._--all the moths called chimney - sweeps
climbed the scroll of fame still higher .
in all the workshops through the country round .
so rapt was heaven in the dear refrain ,
thet night , i tell ye , she looked _ some _ !
was on the wal , as thou miht wite ,
can cheer us ; but the way seems long ;
i thought the bridegroom was flurried rather ,
nor the mistress ' calves be frightened ,
but pitying glances , when his only need
o , little lonely mountain spot !
that , had he soared like thistledown , beholders
  the _ sobriquet _ given to lord sidmouth .
viii .
the louder roar a thousand rills ,
and the draught - foal snorted on her ,
in sheer rage .
would only writhe and hesitate ;
mr . hezekiah hinkle stood stock - still .
more liquor is spent and with better content
to mock each other , uttering , as may chance ,
for the glitter of gold in the gold of their hair .
moi seul je veille et ne vois dans ce monde
in the light that the straggling moonbeams lent :
the kindred form , which now the king surveys ,
no life , save his and ours , intrudes
and if her nature well thou contemplate .
why snakes that crawl the earth should ply
¡ bello es vivir ! se ve en el horizonte
made thee rest here , that thou mayst rise with saints .
well , i had given up wearing it : nowadays , custom compels us
ah ! oftentimes i used to look
from the world 's ends great hosts of monstrous things ,
sweetly , as i recall it , tears do fall ,
substances , and those were top of the world in which pure act was
wavy tree - tops , yellow whins ,
bewildered by the whole affair
by these blanchings , blooms of old ,
review the acts performed , and see
good - bye , good - bye , to everything !
alas ! i leave no trace behind--
and now he thundered around us , and now he was whirling far .
all dread of killing now is flown ;
to catch the last notes of the linnet , mows
dulness is ever apt to magnify .
were it not better from this warlike rout
for i am great apollo 's favourite swain :
while she , within her lowly cot , which graced
_ cheek for chow _ , close and united , brotherly , side by side .
like a resistless flood , come rolling on :
loved , honoured as the king by thee :
and turns aside his scythe to vulgar things ,
grasp , although it shone ever so near , etc .
the long road and the dark shore , pools with stars aflame ,
temple or shrine , wrapt up in life , set round
its dam who not without an idle tremor
fleet coursers whirled the car along :
while danger sat upon the prow .
because so puissant was lurcanio 's might ,
revel and feast assumed the rule again :
and all the various teachers of the school .
and broad across the iris swam the black
_ weavers of webs are we _ .
for truth and justice stand .
o'er this bread god 's grace be poured ,
his tenderness by night , by day ,
i stood -- a stone .
just from the convent 's cloistered school ,
and the laughter turn to wail ,
' alt !   the married kit ' as all to go before us !
their darkened hearts from error , ere they harden it to sin ;
wrap thyself in them as a robe ,
when stead of praise for honest doing }
yawns the chasm ; on air must ride
looks through the horizontal misty air
i must make a wish , for wise folks
and as to things
thine arts to take it still elude ,
which is by pleasure bound in you anew
where other hearts are sick of the same bruise ;
like the wild beasts . i shall be even blest
in sorrow by thy bier we stand ,
which narrow close the space for cortex cells .
my nymph and my incomparable queen
and then
though inland far we be ,
knowing that , though love cease ,
' guilty thou art of murder and of theft ;
_ leave lies to rattle in the sieve of time ! _
-- give me , " she cried , " my armour and my steed . "
is now disclos'd .   i see how ye your plumes
yet newest , and sweet to learn .
is unsheathed the jagged lightning ,
the mighty son of tydeus thus replied .
' across the desert wide ,
they lay them low on biers reclined ;
and broken quivers ere it dieth wholly ,
he had not spoke his purpose to the end ,
and two of them , in form of messengers ,
those once flew high , who 're now on crutches creeping ;
to toy as with the shadow of an act ,
in that one darkest hour , before the dawn is here ,
when he hummed in court an old love - tune ;
and its light in your sweet words ;
he could fill forty pages with safe erudition ,
and me . "   " oh , mother , take me in beside you ,
than any seventy - fifth could be ,
and his chin upon his breast ;
when he to perfect age should come ,
arrived one tuesday night--
should i not consent to free thee ,
' in what i did , let me be made
( not through typhaeus , but the vap'ry cloud
emphasize the grace
when her approach the county 's first intent
concealed many primal germs , commixed
" no , my friend , i will not tread
those late proud domes of splendour , pomp and ease
but of all grub we love you the best .
and now she must brave the chill night air .
derided , spurned , yet uncomplaining ;
and sudden tears his eye bedewed .
with days and nights of misery 's martyrdom ,
how trained to scale the eminences , pluck
slowly vanished chibiabos !
" send him empty from the feast , "
there are faces set like a wall ;
and the bugle horn sounds merrily in the chamber of the dead ;
and white arms droop o'er the sculptured sills ,
thou hast been their friend ;
this nootka sound , so far remote ,
tis borne on the zephyr at eventide 's hour ;
the dread remembrance wore her heart away :
and the waters round it gurgle and sob ,
his head upon his hands , and wept , not knowing
when to the gates of modern rome
is wasting an hour upon you _ ]
of her husband -- to exchange the love which she now has for filial
then a throbbing thunder , split and seared
they have apprehended , what new art they have evolved ,
speaking thus the fish when heard he -- full of pity all his heart ,
browt in some thaasands more ;
to show the argive men the splendour of fire .
a curse on england 's frantic schemes !
sheep - worry of europe , when pigmy napoleon enter'd
what is't that sits next the bride ,
there is a poor , blind samson in this land ,
but could you love a larrikin
behold , another eve i bid you see
i will forge the loom of silver ,
i lived , and understood that mystic tongue ,
its sole duty !
sche wolde be his leve go
the _ ash _ , pale with anger , derided " the crew , "
the martial scarf and robe of triumph wove .
are her thoughts so far amiss
guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight ,
his own name in crimson letters struck diagonally
in the other gardens
" i have moved in those old strongholds of the night ,
indeed , the senate of poets have chosen verse as their fittest
desert me not , " i cried , " in this extreme .
though poor the praise , and barren be the gain ,
for passions that were not my own , and think
as if he heard the distant matin bell ,
go , let thy fancies range
haste from the court , ye spoilers , haste away :
to suck the flowers , and drink the spring .
when the millions in our room ,
be born in the nation 's birth ;
should bear the fresh soul of the boy
ascending up , with many a stately stayre ,
and give your sister half ?
of mist before the god of day
like vales of which ezekiel told !
and shakes her head , and has her fears ;
when thy god is nigh--
final drama consists in leaving all and passing beyond .
but feeds on the aerial kisses
of him -- the master - mocker of mankind ,
and , like a giant 's chanting , the deep voice of the sea ,
and here they love to weave their dancing ring ,
and slepest in thi bedd at ese ,
and glorious church the champion wo nt to be ,
for we have slayne your fat falow dere
but with no friendly voice , and add thy name
all possibles o'erlying .
the two that out of north had followed him :
the silent thoughts of odin which can never change .
i sat up , shivering , and said ,
the wild sea - winds with golden trumpets blaze !
' be not frightened , useful metal ,
so far , my lords , o’er land and sea
unfurnished in thy heart , from whence are fed
from west to east , from south to north .
i mean each globe , whether of glaring light
of viśvámitra , wise and great ,
when ' gainst the thunder 's mouth we marched forth :
to daṇḍak ’s tangled forest came
' sunny plains ' !   great scott ! -- those burning
mechanical ; instead of being the most luminous and self - possessed
crystal , before the crystal broken be upon a stone .
and gracious talk and pleasant courtesies ,
curly head , and laughing eyes,--
composed , the result of no fugitive emotion or thought , are
to the vast soul that o'er him planned ;
i forgive thee , iseult!--thou wilt stay ?
who would not change his proudest wreathes for thine ,
with broken sabres and with dinted shields ,
at that outrageous bug i shot
" play me no tricks , " said lord ronald ,
of all the rides since the birth of time ,
there dwelt a race , who slow their eyes around
i entered in , and spake the words the lord
she thought no v'ice he d sech a swing
some knowledge to which , singly , we were blind .
_ her _ bower was desolate .
give us a new creation , and present
their war clubs in his face with sneer and taunt ,
which ne'er deserted me . as far as spain
" we hear the song of heaven ! " they say ;
( written to an old folk - tune )
creaking when they rubbed together ,
' shoot , if you must , this old gray head ,
and to let the child be born
yet the mystic sits by the sacred stream
of spirits , and their secret wealth !
glowering brows ,
they shrink , they vanish into air .
" thus prepared ascend the sledge ,
hemodian taurus frowns her northern bound :
depths where my soul recoiled sits , there are
the farmyard chanticleer .
o bring my long - lost love , my powerful charms .
who was spotted with brown :
this strong , wholesome presence .   his little room bare
for pastime and delight , as is the use
and over - rated our small power to learn .
though quittance nears ?
welth is fykle and out nf awe
lacking in all this modern age requires
the trojan pass'd , the city to survey ,
has brought it to its closing hour .
and mourn o'er joys too bright to last .
blest wi ' content , and milk and meal ,
and mothers plead for them while thus they speak .
for all oppression is captivity .
of ráma reft , to live one hour :
therefore in sight of man bereft
the only writer fellow
protesting that one man can no more move the mass
whose songs are silent , how should i forget
across the sky in one great bloom of fire .
ever to justify
and the yellow sun - flower by the brook in autumn beauty stood ,
the strength of her united worth .
" the winter ash , long dried ,
till they came to senlis town ,
by neptune 's rage , in horrid earthquakes fram'd ,          }
thus aloud cried hiawatha
stood beside the rolling tunxis
were i dispos'd to curse the man i hate ,
hardyknute show that literary poets of 1719 had not knowledge or
but mamma said , " no , my love , stay where you are .
" will be in your paper a brilliant affair ;
at least a dozen took a hand .
all things have some little value ,
less familiar than the rest .
is like a sword without a handle , piercing
when morning comes , lo ! all are nought .
sentiment were first devised , is the secret here of a borrowed ,
in the winter she died and left me lone .
like a spray,--
than the housewives of the farmers ,
straight rode out to meet them a royal vested band ,
full quick these armed hosts did o'erthrow ,
let me to thy bosom fly _ , " etc .
adown the breathing tresses of the flow'r
the independent commoner
of retribution and undying pain .
all the mighty law decisions ,
so through her forest trees ,
i 'd raise my voice in grateful lays ,
he had a bow bent in his hand ,
tangled in one black maze of crashing spars ,
must share the loneliness divine . _ "
as you set it down it broke--
wheat has been sown , harvests have grown ,
for their arching necks are firmer ,
should often be the cost of all that 's true !
et ideo cum deo in coelis revivit . " ]
oh !   if death came now i should be afraid :
seke nat the way whiche ledeth vnto hell
of kings and kingdoms here ;
friends with each other and with sleep ...
but i have learnt the years , and know the yet
far in tuonela 's great forest ,
the fragrant blue smoke drifting by
only i know while day grew night ,
thy stormy scourges ;
though it be , as they , perforce ,
and my sweet father , to encourage me ,
which but to sing , if it may be ,
" and where will ye gang to mak your mend ,
buss me and hang on my hips and lean up to my shoulders ,
when you were weighing twenty stone and i but ten stone three !
far up the skies the rumor of the dawn
other hard object inside , to make the ringing.--it is a
is cheerless as his heart : but piety
truth in a deep well lieth--
he found one of the kinsmen with his sword drawn in his hand ;
while through their earth - moor'd nave below
plunge in the pond again . the maids in haste
at last i felt uneasy in
their joys are fewer and their labours more .
over - sated with beauty and silence , will seem
now what , may i ask , could the emperor do ?
by hunting and shooting . "
of full many a so - called chaste woman we find
i have had timely warning .   send the twain
wi ' a gant at the wag - at - the - wa ' .
pay me for thy warm retreat
two of his men some distance , and come as from the foe ,
the farmers can not be beat ,
in the toils of guilt to snare me--
in living rills a gushing fountain broke :
when full six weeks are over , we 'll let the warriors know ,
think of either eating or drinking in your house until you have
i even stood god - farther to the kid .
tour carelesse flocks on hils and open plaines ,
rule , britannia ! britannia rules the waves !
and though your welfare and command
i burnt my fingers , i feel it yet ;
all pinafores freely enter here ! " _
frown and look sullen ev'rywhere .
and stealing wily from a grove of pines
unum impetrassem te reuocante diem :
prophet of the ripened year !
down you cast your garment fair ,
his ships are vanish'd from the main ,
near by in his chosen ambush ,
thus phoebus did our future fates disclose :
till the discourteous and foul pact was made
from love that shields not love ! yea , it were juster
probably , the story of the nymph cyane reproaching pluto with his
there lycia ’s monarch paid him honours due ,
most generous in dowering earth and sea
and alien wakes traverse the sea ;
neath mistletoe , should chance arise ,
in literary spheres as master of
or of pinions pure that beat
the lovers , as they read betimes
its whitened crest ,
never close down thine eyelids with love 's prayer ,
some humble door among thy many mansions ,
as , dimly seen , the pirate of the brook--
of this adventure , when with plaint and moan ,
' twas driver smith of battery a was anxious to see a fight ;
dona conscientiae ,
untouch’d she stay’d , uninjured she removes ,
speak to man if one is worthy
then answered sir king diderik ,
( sweet gillian , she that broke the groom his heart ) ,
whenas some kind
made my heart swell , and still it grew
you and your court came north together .
song that the harlequin drops in his frolicking
one hour laconic and the next verbose ,
of the realm 's government , and so great power
ah , me ! let the day have his schemers ,
while all before , the billows ranged on high ,
as day dies into dark .
of renunciation and accept my excuses , o god!--thou
breathless with adoration ; the broad sun
plum - pudding , goose , capon , minced - pies , and roast - beef .
or frost of alpine hill .
# to be sung delicately , to an improvised tune . #
when love delays , when love delays and death
madness o'er the spirit threw ;
what ! you ( she cried ) unlearn'd in arts to please ,
“ ev'n time itself , just like a passing stream ;
if hoarded gold possest the power
that man to man , the warld o'er ,
between what was above and the flower impede the sight and the
that i have aided thee , i danger run
the sky , o'ercast , too darkly frowned ,
breathless and speechless ; utter weariness
los estados y riqueza
which sprinkles benediction through the dawn ;
that cranch the reeds , through which the sea - horse goes .
and thou that road ,
live and let live , as i will do ,
with the beautiful water about you curled ,
dispensing pardon and dispelling fear .
naught could their hungry rage of greed appease ,
thou must not here thy wife forsake ,
and bleating from the little calf
but _ what _ , dolly , what , is the gay orange - grove ,
and silent waters heaven is seen ;
and above me and around
no , she is athirst and drinking up her wonder :
manifestly the second champion of the grecians ; and ulysses
yet by no sunset and by no moonrise
loose him , and loose him now , that with these eyes
but invisible glories dispense wide over the war - gleaming plain .
pour out from him . ]
temples , and colonnades are neighboured there
i arise to - day
now knoweth he , that the degrees of heav'n
worship or service -- which ? ah , that is best
_ crackin ' _ , cracked , conversing , conversed .
and your head dan - dangling by :
till sunday asks another homily
in finger he discovers heat
was all the sound i heard .
make the birch - tree their protector ,
picks them from the trunks of birches ,
we start the damned attack ; and , lord knows why ,
some little sign of favor show ,
love and the graces evermore do wait
in the information .   yesterday afternoon i repeated this exploit ,
in camp or court , who _ are _ not ,
or else the king come home from the crusade !
moulding well a golden image ,
that power oppressive , limitless ,
stand here by my side and turn , i pray ,
to burn you dead and burn you clean ,
arrive with you ;
her five strong sons !
no other champion can his place supply ,
where on the walls , by polygnotus ' hand ,
and win by turns the kingdom of the sky :
yet not without one fond memorial
type of a careless nation ,
show me that world of stars , and whence
ensamples couthe telle ynowe
as a little stone in a running stream , it seems to lie and pine .
a spirit is singing from the coves
to see her red coats marching from the hill !
come far too soon , if they appear
whose recreations are
for quhy ? thou art with her possest .
but we lickit our lips at the rest o't .
the youths as they pass her , exclaim—“woe is me ! ”
loose not those arch lips from their rosy chain ;
' will the child kill me with her foolish prate ? '
with righteous pains for criminal delights .
" than garbled text or parchment law
weingarts , weingarten,(ger . ) - vineyards .
high on a down we found him last ,
" we 're trav'ling to eternity,"--
thought . hope waits
the gods to her last wish was tractable .
the world made better by me knows if weak
« y no hay playa ,
i wish that i were christopher marlowe .
" eat it up , young speckle - head ! "
save that a forked cloud or two
is a soul ' forgot ' !
and we saw the kirk , before us , as we trotted down the fells ,
provokes my envie , this new favorite
gentlemen - rankers out on the spree ,
in spite of foes or deadly blowes ,
mr . arnold has justly observed that this self - justifying ,
enribbed and wrought with groins of ghastliness ,
she paus'd , and she listen'd intently , in fear ,
but far in the fierce sunshine tower the hills ,
in safety from the marge of styx profound .
make many a watcher start ;
mighty shout ?
for when before him comes th ' ill fated soul ,
they sing of the mighty master ,
beside my garden gate .
only think that he has perished .
her eyes were fair , and very fair ,
thenceforth beheld she , nor no second time
except don juan , a mere novice , whose
fresh taxes still on taxes grew ;
thro ' the lawlands , o'er the border ,
he flung him to his charger 's back ,
only the doubt you taught me to weld in the fires of youth
and he waved his hand and paused and smiled
should i remain confinèd there
( bright was the fire and sweet was the wind )
hewn for the lord , do we hold
it biddeth us learn all the wisdom it knoweth ;
decant the cham :
with a wild mane of golden - glistering hairs .
reach'd the world 's limit .   soon as to that part
she stopped -- she listened -- she almost smiled--
attain'd a good old age .
we papered and made so clean ,
had made it so like in every part
as ben the wordes of hire mouth :
my hopes no more must change their name ,
wrote o or i , he kindled , burn'd , and chang'd
firm , united , let us be ,
how oft the sadness that i show ,
when he , of royal saints the type ,
it goes without saying that this is a romantic conception , wholly
and the small birds , one and all ,
surely , we said , is the net
waiting for fate on ghost heath hill .
when your swift hair is quiet in death ,
that neither tongue nor pen could follow it .
full little were they idle , / the men of monarchs three .
what time the gray fly winds her sultry horn ,
and care not for the giver . strange indeed
we was ' idin ' under bedsteads more than ' arf a march away ;
no lovers with close arm - encircled waists
traced the every curve and lissome
stood in the gates , and ask’d " what way she bent
your name amidst the sacred smoke .
but how he thither came long time he mused ,
and because by night he could not see ,
come , that i may not hear the winds of night ,
for under her arm she carried a broom .
he groped and fiddled doggedly along ,
the meanest hind in fair scotland
the second to the feasters poured the wine ;
atoned by sacrifice , desist to wound . "(67 )
and with fixt eye examined every place ;
over misty hills and waters flowing ,
and tumble up and down what thou findst there .
with this he smote aeneas near the groin ,
love me a little , lord , or let me go ,
hear , land o ' cakes and brither scots ,
that the birch canoe stood endwise ,
shall i wear an iron armor ,
sed mane clarescent novo
for each to scatter ; they flushed like the buds in sun ,
when all things round thee sweetly smile ,
the eighth one you shall be .
copyright holders :
by the which thou didst on the billows walk .
out i march with bat and pad :
and when the earth expires ,
and years for evermore .
quid color hic roseus sibi vult ?   designat amorem :
then the blacksmith ilmarinen
climes favour'd high with thy perennial sway ,
you have no fear of murdering a wife .
valentian , that famous town ,
  _ the observator _ , june 2 - 6 , 1705 . tutchin stated , in _ the case ,
steal your partner , skip to my lou ,
where the high lords whom ilion knew so well
but i know my heart am glad
after all . the room was closed with well - made doors opening in
my quiet country grave !
at the too of italy , together with the two rivers named , give
that with seven hard bulls ' hides was surely lined ,
exposed her too much to the wind ,
angel - love . . . golden - yellow and far white . . .
" up rose the sun ; the mists were curl'd
o envy not
the embodied greeks the fierce attack sustain ,
it was a wet day of july ; i was alone and happy over my play .
so on she pass'd ; and had not set , i ween ,
such a thing is not fine enough to send :
till it could come no more .
falling : and there king lot lay slain ,
" you taught not that which you set about , "
equinoctial is called the tropic of cancer , because the sun
and the intent of tyranny avowed ,
two princely sons the lady bare ,
and , thinking that i did it from desire
" just as you say . here 's looking at you then.--
mœstum sol hodiè caput ,
( ll . 232 - 251 ) that was a warlike band .   the leaders of the army
a glorious mould of fading clay ,
if the last bond be not within the new
e'en thus along the gulf moves every flame ,
their surly eyes brow - hidden , heavy paws
that are held reasonable among the immortal gods . "
“ if of the first the fate you seek to know ,
glen , and glade , and silent trees .
wrote .
( if you call snooks an owl , he will show by his looks
to earth .
bound in a coronal of clasping gold ,
and whispering evermore
that chose and loved you in his happiest times ,
" but i say we will , " sayes firy - faced phill ;
of ghosts , and communed with their solemn queen ;
partner .
a sympathy august and pure ;
listen ; there is more : "
where the child is painting the kitten
than me there is no other master , prince !
now other sounds were heard , for on this night
in garden - silks , brocades , and laces ?
a tyrian colony ; the people made
and why are we hampered and why are we checked ?
mais mon âme , qu'un cri un peu cru exacerbe ,
and knew that all the riches of her youth
to clasp thy hand in mine ,
save only that her balmy breath
outspread , that reach the horizon round ,
months have passed , my faithful steed , both you and i are older ,
of the maid i love the best :
shape like a sworded seraph -- sweet and grave ;
" the motley crew , in vessels new ,
i 'll tell you all about the ball
and there he got a roundhead .
when down swung the sound of a far - off bell .
her eyes fast fix'd on the eternal wheels ,
" ah well , ah well ! you artists flatter . "
shone through the rifted clouds on high ,
so kind a star thou seem'st to be ,
the heavenly joy that can not find the word ?
she purchased some clogs ,
" their light into the inmost heart ,
from every idol part .
the fields wherein i stood .
to - morrow 's light would bring .   his rushing stem
but , by god , we will not yield you our god ,
make the timid brave and mighty ,
for the fish thy father captured ,
at midnight , a proud soldier shelter sought
thy _ talk _ was somewhat still :
until the music of love and praise
the sky is clear and bright .
her life , in fact , they 're loath to spare her .
sprang from the troubled main .
and there before his brother ’s eye ,
no more unequall'd hold her codrus ' name ;
a little while when i am gone
it missed his helm , but gashed his thigh ;
thus as he stod and hiede nam ,
tennyson 's shorter poems .
diffuse abroad their own tranquillity ,
nec trucis ala noti verberat : ille jubet .
_ chorus_--three rounds , etc .
a blackguard smuggler , right behint her ,
victus precanti solus in lacrimis fuit :
therefore it is this great misfortune has befallen me ,
to fight that god and our right be made
fairness nor fruit , while the green tiny tuft
of memories sacred from the scorner ?
i see thee not -- i hear thee not -- but none
should to the dogs of troy remain a prey ,
and starts the rapture of thine eye
and thirsty all of one man 's blood they flew ;
be a game lady bug -- see the game through !
a stillness , which leaves room for the full soul
our god , heaven can not hold him
and the wedding - beer fermented ;
listen well to what i tell thee
to the waves at their wildest stood roger montrose .
o square thyself for use , 122 .
every whizzing of an arrow
the day - long glory of his steadfast gaze
what stronger breastplate than a heart untainted ?
all to leave and follow thee ;
( taking his two neighbors by the hand . the rest do the same ,
to clens his mynde from all synfull cryme
opposed in combat on the dusty shore .
well , yes,--if you saw us out driving
is it not heat ,
o'er hill and river and upraised
let them teach us how to shoot it .
and thus shal troye turne to asshen dede .
for christ 's sweet sake and charity !
making it but a hollow tinkling sound ,
when clancy took the drover 's track
why his utmost urge of strength
the tortoise shell comb that she lost that day
but the rude plain beneath the ploughshare 's stroke
very line as prose in letter xxxiv of
come away ! come , sweet love !
dimly defined beside a wide - spread basin ,
for he clings unto the parting shore ,
so balder said;--but oder , well i know ,
so full of splendor and of joy ,
with folded wings that do not live ,
to the place where god was homeless
but , dying , believe that my willie 's my ain .
upon a torrid ocean ; and no wing
" loo " , i.e. lanctre- or lanterloo , a popular
i 'm not on my confession ,
at party 's call , my gift i bring ;
of that long - chain'd succession is so frail ;
preserves from dark misfortune ’s hour ,
this tale of elder - world : of earth ’s first prime ,
" o shun th ' annoyance of the bustling throng ,
cried , welcome , truant brother ; and then took
upon its border is built a city , dodona ; and zeus loved it and
the palmes put forth their gemmes , and every tree
to council in the citie gates : anon
that there came entring into th ' hall ,
thought worthy to obtain it ; but without pity
my baffled gaze would only catch
his flowin ' locks , ye recollect , wuz frivolous an ' free ;
preserve me from my fear and woe . ”
known to that froward , that unreckoning heart
or the graver margaret 's stately grace ;
and beatrice after him her words
and the waves that rose in resistless yearning
a boundless empire , and that owned no sway .
younger for all the winters thou hast cast :
the teacher , panting like a man forespent ,
" ' tis meet to _ you _ the secret should be told ,
the tender quatrain where your moral sings--
thither do my musings go !
bidding my organ obey , calling its keys to their work ,
loud claps of thunder shook the sons of pride ,
to dim the happy task half done ,
as on her bosom there--
but play me the well - known air once more ,
ever i longed for the walls and the streets ,
" behind the curtains , i had hid the tried
to speak by tears , before ye have a tongue .
... can trace
i wept that all must die--
ever , ever , ever ,
light as the sea - birds dipping their white wings
sic - like , some tyke grawn auld and blind ,
then they two went forth , from whom
and bitterer was the grief devoured alone .
by what gushed the bitter spear on ,
old , does he call me ?   fear not ye mine age .
in golden pomp against the dark
the enclosed two announcements have just met my eyes
had squeezed from heaven and bottled up in bags . _
then , with a gurgling moan , like the sound in the throat of the
he who long seeks a high goal unattained ,
who cost her mother tellus keener pangs ,
at thought of those soft folded wings ,
of more ambitious builders , yet by love ,
and breathed by winds that through the free heaven blow .
but who that is young and glad and strong
according to thy word . "
the rose - red temple of our dreams :
oh ! then there is freedom , and joy , and pride ,
deep in my heart the vision is ,
into thine hour of secrecy :
very crude , and causing doubt
whose young , gentle heart on her relied ,
such is the power of reputation justly acquired , that its blaze
urge her to choose whomsoever she will , and i will give her
where shines a star !
and in her slender shape are seen
fragile and white were you , my spirit - bride ,
and slanting on the heated hearthstone sickens ,
maddens with ceaseless hissing o'er the flames
or a late , lonely vigil with memory kept .
` allas , fortune ! if that my lyf in ioye
and , mounting up to heaven , her carol sings .
to echoes in felicity .
" my dearest boy , " the mother said ,
we enter ; nothing 's changed or older .
yet the way seemed long before him ,
than here at liswyn farm . "
for fear the man might die .
this pomp is praiséd there .
a stinging serpent by the heele her caught ;
close - sepulchred away from you !
and only cared for power ; content to shed
o thou to whom is litwa 's spirit dear !
counting and narrowing o'er and o'er ;
we charge thee , breathe it to the dusk ;
first , since i teach concerning mighty things ,
o'erpowering us to be whate'er may seem
for yer hand will be in mine .
but always we -- may walk its hallowed ways ;
and to the floor a lustre lent
hans mean de city syndic ,
ascend , by intercession of thy sire . "
and ever the yells of the charred men burning ,
your leaders slow ;
' tis saying to one that we love : " forgive
have ye now yielded to some stronger might ,
i scourged you till you spread your wings
giant battle - axes smote each dell .
like she 'd _ die _ a - laughin ' .
loose were her tresses seen , her zone unbound ;
for the forest 's leafy tangle ,
hour when our silver ponds shimmer in the light
when the green gits back in the trees--
late , till the west was ashen
and priestly hands , for jesus ' blessed sake ,
triumphantly ! a universal shout
at once her brother and her brother - in - law , hurrying hither and
roughly , and neither rain nor snow can fall ; but it abides in
" is he dead , gery ? " said i.
within , every one ; and when the wooers miss them and ask
_ in twofold language . _ ] in sanskrit and prakrit . the latter is a
miratur quibus ille disciplinis
at last old morgan , looking through
thick blood in rain they shed ;
in the days of our youth ,
when all things are made new .
sometimes so vague , so undefined
oh , come with old khayyam , and leave the wise
the edition contained about 100 copies .
this wonderous change sthenelian cycnus saw ;
an ' stockings , too -- six , seven , eight , nine !
and turn those limpid eyes on mine ,
who come on shaggy ponies from pamere ;
shew'd that sterne warre had newly bath'd him there .
no injury to them or you .
yet blame not me for golden venus ' gifts :
then bade he fitting quarters / for the retinue prepare .
a joy unto the mournful forest given !
but the shops were all closed ,
when she had done speaking eumaeus went back to the suitors , for
on earth is not his equal .
but , oh , thy lies shall ne'er beguile !
and when you sit in your palace halls ,
in flying from thy fond embrace ,
three hours of tempest , and three days of night ;
bran'y , brandy .
for nine more years had darkened in their eyes ,
and ghastly visions break any sleep by night ,
intellect soon becomes luxurious , and knowledge finds no willing
a. wail where camden 's martyrs fell ,
and all of it doubtless has something to do
at the gates of thy supreme judge rhadamant .
in squads , in file , in line ,
and will paint it free of cost .
nothing remains of unrecorded ages
" o thou ! whose glory fills the ethereal throne ,
all day upon her father 's knees ,
in words that have no shadow .   what is dark
though at my head thou pluck a thousand times . "
first of the watch that guarded in their place ,
" forsake ( said she ) those swelling sails
has again ventured over to visit your shore .
until -- the sunlight strong in our dry eyes--
by the perfumed music--
" hear ye , my lords , we are sore bested .
one , the duchess in her veil .
and foams and sparkles for awhile,--
when the tree 's horror trembled on my taste !
say merlin from king arthur 's court is here ,
the good , which sets a bound to our aspirings ,
hath pierc'd it , and improv'd the smart .
grudge not the green leaves ravished from thy stem ,
no flower was there that could compare
is a trick all seamen larn ,
diffuse their balmy sweets around .
but o as to embrace me she enclin'd
" i am free ! " at last he said .
many a sinking dream doth fleet
your siller waves nae mair i 'll see .
as was beseeming to their ardent love .
beneath the breast that seems to fall and rise ,
yea , he shall surely curse his impious star
poor moralist ! and what art thou ?
thing with two legs , out on the lawn !
i see the ghost of a perished day ;
by one , and one , the bolts full easy slide:--
the sea is our mother , the cloud is our brother ,
printed soon afterwards . ]
to that same lot , however mean or high ,
_ the magic car moved on _ ( from " queen mab " ) , 162 ;
" ilmarinen , worthy brother ,
by groans , and graves , and miseries that groan
flows the river of life between .
bitter and bitter it is for thee . o my heart ,
the ladie was not seen !
and drake , be - mused , leaned smiling to his friend
up rose the mighty anchorite ,
when first the white thorn blows ;
and another and another , and faster and faster
or much more grievous pain ?   ye have th ' account
tell me , piper , have i ever
and boast to every age her patriot names ,
most lasting and most honour'd there was i
but with devotion deepened
well - nigh can my song conjecture
as they pass to their stalls , through the tightly - packed rows ,
make you the worst and vilest of your kind ,
yaf the conquestes that he wan ;
and damaged quite beyond repair
no fairer shone on sea ,
the front appear'd with radiant splendours gay ,
could unbewildered meet those matchless eyes ?
priamo vi vitam evitari , etc .
next they that bear her , honoured on this night ,
far up to heaven ,
pandare answerde , ` it may wel be , certeyn ;
the seeming promise of his life ;
close to the wind , departing from the bay ;
that never has known the barber 's shear ,
i came , a leader on the part of troy .
you must have heard that paul was dead , by this time--
three fishers went sailing out into the west ,
to burst the chains , and shun her wiles .
and you fled and you fled , and my two hands
some days of toil will never spoil
protects me , but where my peace ?
i ai nt a wig , i ai nt a tory ,
not half worthy the like of you :
where'er thou goest , smiling is the way ;
for all they did in seasons past ,
and night upon the pope :
shall thrust him headlong from his gerent seat
one shall give pleasure      to people assembled
and the past is all plain to malinche .
inflexible in faith ; invincible in arms .
liii . " ' nay , when thy vessels , ranged upon her shore ,
if thou our maiden hands wouldst gain .
and looking out over the domes and towers
thou hast breeze - like visitings ;
i feel its tears upon my hand .
but i said , " that i will not . "
' ex ore infantium . '
naught he will tell of distant lands ;
an virgo vera est , an sit eburnea ;
with his neck and its wen in the selfsame place ;
of hire ymaginacion ;
but -- should she come no more!--
may god , our father , save sweet france this shame ! "
exquisite imitation of the ancient writers , by the purity of the
that writen in the time tho
the marigolds , poppies , and pansies so sweet
saved himself by swerving aside and the spear struck archelochus
there was a young lady of corsica ,
aeneas medon slew , and iasus ;
he has opened his ragged upper garments and his
in tenderness , or grace , or service clear ,
a very clear evidence of this .   we would willingly go on with our
perforce from this , his country , a knight of birth and fame .
then as the waters foamed and boiled ,
of purer fire than e'er
tho ' i find the speaking hard .
a heart so pure as mine . '
--the french held all at bay .
' t is but a wave , whose spreading circle beats ,
evening , " he wrote her at one time . " where did it loiter so
the tiniest silver spoon .
pass the keen wrestlers for that palm,--the state .
the tree is living yet !
but soon as partlo started mill ,
were extant from the wave ; and showing us
and eager they assail'd the ready feast .
on the high - jutting rocks of this fissure and keep
that the fair would have been a different thing
where night sublimely sparkles on the flowing
' neath the moon ,
while many a dainty , gathered from the sea
came a hush , and the host was uplifted ,
marveled much at the kind he " chawed . "
thy lessons were ev'n academie rules .
flee this place , thou plague of northland ,
unless you 're very poor .
jumping from jokes back to the want ads ,
crystal , thermal , or mineral spring ,
and lean years to come .
of the huge , broad - breasted , old oak tree .
all , all to oppose
i went down de road ,
to bless the friend who gave thy madness bounds .
and happiness is everywhere , oh , mother , but with me !
clogg'd with his clothes , and cumber'd with his years :
no -- hapless pair -- you've lookt your last:--
in awe . yet pity
the wise call that man wise ; and such an one ,
he was with worthi compainie
william , and renard , and duke godfrey drew
the woods of autumn , all around our vale ,
no sooner lifted i mine aspect up ,
to devour thine evil body ,
seemed the conductor that drew down
and still tried to tease .
aid where tears of virtue flow ;
of lofty seaton - delaval ;
high with both hands she heav'd it , and off his head did smite
φησι . . . . δῆλον δὲ ὡς ἐτεθήπει τοῦ ποιητοῦ τὴν μεγαλόνοιαν καὶ
but just listen , i pray .
who never doubted , never half believed ;
and earth , thy mother , only one in thee ?
and youth 's lovely visions recede with the ray .
and autumn with a sad smile fled uncrown'd
to leave their quarrel in such guise the two
babe of time , old in care ,
the fire has caught her apron - string ;
then , when he ceased , in one cold passive hand
to what i 've seen , methinks , would be preferred .
he needs no napkin for his hands ,
ask the way of prior 's cupid .
and seeing , have ye patience ?   smite them all ,
yet , sometimes , sudden sights of grace ,
heart was intent . of such pride here is paid the fee ; and yet i
nutrix ipsa sui , semper alumna sibi .
but oh , it was my third love
ah , this seeming en'my of thine ,
sinking there while the passionless wet flows on -- and i now
the lordly tower , and the battled wall ,
so we must join hands in the dew coming coldly
when the four peck brothers are out ,
" the answer is the same , " the stern voice saith :
of the great shield , wherein the lion lies
fueron un tiempo itálica famosa .
big dragon - flies hung hovering .... snowballs burst
wrought for the holy service of the lord .
and all their merrymaking lay aside
to the tread of a mighty war ,
for horses ' legs and poshay wheels ,
of mortal blessing here the first is health ,
an ' we sweep up their mess through the bloomin ' campaign ,
in age 's gain and youth 's retreat
where night - rack shrouds the old love fugitive .
death of him in the end , for when he went to the house of jove 's
" go thrash that doggie ,
if not , it can be strengthened .
saw the scared vánars turn and run ,
there are warriors with broadswords ,
i would for refuge fly .
the rural pipe , and merry lay
with unmoved heart and stolid eye ;
do with the gold when we got it -- big , shiny nuggets like plums ,
and when i 'd milked a bucketful
so offers he to give what she did crave ;
her vapour - sail the phantom lady guides .
becomes in appearance little and obscure , if in the hand of
" to whit " " to whoo " policeman owl ,
i strolled up old bonanza , where i staked in ninety - eight ,
sat on his throne , upheld by old repute ,
look overhead !
pause to admire a flash that only shows
then piteous levus next
quickly rows him through the channel ,
_ wetherbee . _ yes . who are you ? what do you want with me ?
and why she duly loves to pace
and rompings jolly .
such was hiawatha 's wedding ,
the yellow nasturtium , a spinster all faded ,
haec illi nostro nomine dicta refer :
and complicate strange webs of melancholy mirth .
a little time while it is new !
of latian leaders conquer'd by the dead .
what maketh heaven , that maketh hell .
and ye only mar earth 's bosom
none knows what lies along the way ;
and was not that a dainty dish to set before the king ?
at last : " geraldine mahaffy :
we pass these things,--because " the times " are prest
‘ a female viper ; ’ but it here refers to the hydra , or dragon of
heaven bless the trusty friend , and long
and , for aye , this lone heart cheer ? "
through certeine land , valleys and mountains , on ,
pronounced like ' b 's and 'd 's :
facing the wind , the sunset , the long cloud ,
“ deep from the bottom ; terror - struck i gain'd
i felt quite sure that dearest fred
" are lightly made and lightly broke ,
the clouds concealed it from our sight ,
the snail 's on the thorn ;
der taillefer sang und schürte das feuer gut .
why ? why ?
and my arm about you so ,
low in the mire as she .
lonely , wounded , even dying ;
see hell , canto xxvii . 47 , and note .
and broghte ferst the werres inne .
and breathed himself : then from the closet crept ,
conversation , forcible and often racy , was characterised by the
yet never clutching once , a shadowy goal ,
no peace , no quarter to such imps i lend ,
yellow orange in her hand :
buried was the bloody hatchet ,
the cries of children break the still
or else be hugged to death by bear ,
and as for the work unfinished , all will be paid their due ;
and the wolf - wind on the hill ....
that through all changing lives
o mihi nota adyti iam numina parnasei !
i am content . in trumpet , 107 .
speak thou , and satisfy my wish .   may those ,
thereat on the fourth pier we came , we turn'd ,
so burns my heart . ( nor can i choose but go )
of the crippled , the widow and orphan ,
thou best - beloved , secure and safe with him
back crowded all his school - day joys ;
as wheat to sift us , and we all
whom i upon a two - pair - back met ,
let 's deem it best his rod to kiss ,
join'd we are henceforth ; nor will thy people ,
a second death ; and those next view , who dwell
it is i , who dream myself into the universe ;
that i may depart ungrieving -- fair asoca , answer me .
on the bride and the wedding he made ;
to discourse alone ;
lift up thine eyes unto the hills ;
a goodly record for time to show
' twas but for one half - hour ;
by famous hanover city ;
yet each heart is a battlefield
that my herd is home returning !
in the court - yard , widely branching ;
and we laughed in love 's abandon , and we sang ,
sane , beauteous , benign ,
fathoms deep in dark chaleur
what sickness took my sire away ?
the tyrian train , admitted to the feast ,
and whurle hote flaming fire where tow doth lie
my man is the pithier man .
while we sweeten our toil with a tale or a song ,
and scattered it over the ground ,
with a hornet - nest in reach,--
born from silent snow
then follow you , wherever hie
in which they play their various part ,
by any save by brutus .   sad and stern
a dropsy gives the fatal blow .
a roll of parchment clunn about him bears , ii . 117 .
the rich mould of dead men 's graves .
how they lay down to it ! how they came up !
flatt'ring , only to betray ;
" but still i do n't quite see-- "
of one , his fellow - spirit , and his jaws
forerunners are they of some judgment on us ;
assure thyself thy death will pain me more
' stopped in the straight when the race was his own ! ' ,
and that there 's nothing in it .
but your friend there , the doctor , eats nothing at all . '
maurine , i love you better than my life .
how have i mended what he taught ,
from _ cap - a - pie _ , with many a scar ,
rose - bloom fell on her hands , together prest ,
shut off from priest and spouse .
power may make many earthly gods ,
would you ?
witness the sacred honours of our head ,
pretending she loves me hard ;
and in a brighter sky o'erhead
it answer'd :   " from the day , when it was said
the bliss of being , or with previous pain
lifting our souls from earth
thou a greybeard art -- so i am ;
i always notice that it shows their blood is quick and red ;
for seas and lands shall not divide us
to his pure home he went .
a banished man in field and mart ;
how happy ! those to ruin , these betray .
my numerous footsteps nimbly to retrace ,
his courtiers thus , when helca had ended now her life ,
destroy our enemies , lord . _ '
his errand heard , she cries;--“thy anxious task ,
and ev'ry eye was fixed on her alone :
their zealous herds are vex'd an ' sweatin ' :
inopportune , shrill - accented ,
and night were bright like day ;
dear loss ! since thy untimely fate ,
child of christmas , and a log it was ,
blow hither , from thy caves of blue ,
him the blind hoder met , as he came up
to greet the snow - peaked morn ;
his help - mate .   messenger he seem'd , and friend
qualis ab excelsa praeceps delapsa fenestra
was known as well as to the flowers that grew there .
here and there with dimes on the eyes walking ,
half - circling hills , whose everlasting woods
" praise woman still , " his lordship roars ,
contrary , go home to their dinners with a good stomach and
and the longer and longer he looked at them
where no sound else was moving
must yield its pomp , and wait till ages are its dower .
whose works already ; damn them into fame .
and , with bold worship suddenly aglow ,
ye ken your laureat scorns :
they had not met for months for leisured talk .
the stock er somepin ' . then i tried
who laugh and chat , until the old man cries :
' neath lank ferns i laughing lie ,
men with picked voices chant the names
social position of hellas , and , as a collection , he published
of day light up the wood and stream ,
the minotaur , half human , beast in face ,
far hence inglorious , and i knew it not .
gladly , whoe'er thou art , thy summons we obey .
like a grand amen to a minor song .
entered , as statius has already explained ( canto xxi ) , the vapors
with yellow teeth , making its wet flanks bleed
in my ear is the clatter of chalk against blackboard ,
at saint praxed 's church     robert browning
have made , but forced by nature still to fly ,
no pretty girl for miles about was missing from the floor ;
as , wild , he hurried by .
and let once more , by mystic birth ,
i ca n't count the times i have been at your door .
to know , and this once known , shall soon return ,
of the second day
two hundred solid stanzas , think of that ;
them leaving , polyides next he sought
the lee - lang night , and weep .
hardly had they reach’d the church ’s portal ,
her joy is more in loving you
on this day i lost my husband .
and immovable and fast
it did n't make no diff'rence , though ; i wish i may be cust ,
falerina in orgagna 's garden made ,
where the ducks delight in swimming ,
equipped anew his _ pride _ and _ hope _
as when ( the boys o'erpower'd ) a sluggish ass ,
do not lock thy best provisions
approaching nearer and yet nearer , now
still shall my care for thee provide
and now thy foremost care should be
with party - color'd plumes , a chatt'ring pie .
adam and eve are my two fond doves ,
and by their mortal fault brought in subjection
i miss the bright word in one
the damsel to the monstrous orc they bring ,
if not,--we may not grieve ;
would i that cowlèd churchman be .
troy 's host he prosper'd , and the greeks dispersed .
with the _ í _ by synalepha .
( but it is n't on record the lady tried )
los furiosos vientos ,
their tails that drag the dust , and back
--must be very striking . it needs not a jacobite prejudice to be
he for a thousand years endured
will bring us -- if we keep 'em penned ;
all through july under the blazing sun ,
light of the sapphire skies ,
oh ! this pretty little garden ,
the sun has never visited that city ,
  cattle thieves of yesterday ,
within the dark box of the sleigh ,
of wrong alone,--
british museum , found in the lining of an old trunk by sir w. c.
while through the thronged streets your bridal car
for in his bed he couldna ' bide
is it , o man , with such discordant noises ,
for on the turbid current of his passion
whatever he says she answers not .
and i can hear the sailors and their songs ,
stands for james , who thought it immaterial
her breasts , like ivory globes circled with blue ,
we all must reach the forest shades .
whips they are plying and jackets are flying ,
velim caecilio papyre dicas,--
at first disdain and pride they fear ,
some of their dead , the tomb stones ratled together ; at last the
for i alone , will forward go in search
down , down that town shall settle hence ,
an empire but no throne ,
yes , you , you only , lady fair ,
who twice a day their withered hands hold up
follows close--
and yet could give so fine a stroke ? "
such summer - clouds as travel light ,
on its own wings should good itself upbuoy ;
until his paunch became as fat
we shall be taken , but thou shalt live on ,
the north may think that the south will yield ,
to come in pomp , or bear a secret sail ?
loathly and liquid , as fly from a dish ;
but slumber hold me tightly till i waken in the dawn ,
but when again he turned his visage round
then let each lodge strive all it can ,
our horse 's patience is a wond'rous sight !
see that your feet offend not , nor lightly lift your head ,
he met beside the well .   at set of sun
she came in with the twilight noiselessly ,
beginning , to what point thy soul aspires :
or seeks the den where snow - tracks mark the way ,
losh ! yon 's the " stand by " bell .
below the waist ; the weighty spear broke through
one look , but linger with delight , and fain
and keenin ' to mysel ' .
where she nam'd the disease she now separates the bacillus ;
and enid heard the clashing of his fall ,
on this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against achilles ,
roll in on the souls of men ,
yon fair child in his arms ,
this mummery and this merriment ,
street was london house , which continued for some time to be the
like the care - burthen'd honey - fly
upon the yellow slopes of far - off farms ,
all europe saved , yet britain not betrayed .
trickles neither blood , nor water ,
" strange constellations burned above my head ,
and even now when they speak of the governor
its very courage stagnates to a vice .
not for ten days her headlong flight forbore :
and thy heart as pure as they :
may you never know the sadness
o daughters of dreams ?
he said , “ mayhap my strain may please , when wind
culpante , nunc torrentia agros
whose face and eyes none may see ,
how amazement leapt into every eye ,
the potent word awoke him from his nap ,
far - famed and wise , who came to see the child ?
painless and swift , set free her airy soul ,
determined voice :   " i 've heard about you and your
thought -- has ceased to hold our attention .   we know that we must
thy lore is learned . earth 's wonders are thine own ,
dainty , genteel , and good - mannered for an hour , that it impressed
that starlight o'er the waters thrown--
than i may ryde ayein on half a morwe ,
" is there any need ? " she asks .
for yonder path conducts thee straight to slaughter .
adown the glade .
she 's after cider , the old girl , she 's thirsty ;
what follows from the admission ? it establishes no new truth , it
judgment drops her damning plummet ,
i check my swift pursuit : for see where lie ,
' to blast the fury of oppressive might ,
if sadly bowed his head--
and there -- was heaven revealed !
of holy murder , rolling to the clouds
when strife and suffering are regnant ,
scales he perceives , upon his harden'd skin ;
departed whigs enjoy the fight ,
postremo in magno populo , in multis hominibus ,
mid the thronged bustle of the city street ,
and when all bodies meet
gave utterance to sighing sounds of dole .
your sadel on the tayle : yf ye lyst to sit soft .
she pray'd the virgin mary for her grace ,
how frozen i became and powerless then ,
with thanks for such an hour as this ,
as if ' t were something still to be
how she keeps her mouth shut and turns out her toes .
because so drives me onward the long theme ,
will make a quaker swear !
glancing around his prison room -
on this devolv'd with power to take away
and at thy prayer her puny strength extol
o ken ye what it is that 'll daunton me?--
stepped forth thierry speedily ,
chatillyon and the constable are slaine .
him to bestow a town , -- a realm -- i see ,
caesar hispana repetit penatis
the strephon and lydia mentioned in the song were perhaps the
_ sing , my bullies , let the bullgine run . _
the graves of time , as in elysium meet!--
she is a mother , too ;
but aye loved the open sea .
fixed am i and await the dark to - be
by his magic art he made it ,
behind , that profits not himself , but makes
give , pitying , one that is of mortal birth . "
no longer than what time latona 's twins
of this new world ; at whose sight all the stars
betok'ning peace from god , and cov'nant new .
its searching roots are wound ,
i shake off sleep and forthwithal climb up aloft and win
or friar , sworn in peace to bide
what music is that in whose measure the world is rocked ?
to her description she was fear'd to go
how lovely is the sunshine of may - morn !
look down and see the world , and all the ways of men ! "
the great bell beating far and near-
nor georgia boast one flower so fair .
like some good fairy , freedom marks and blesses her domain ; " _
who through his harness felt the sting
lifts those to - morrow , whom she lowers to - day .
chiselled toledo blades , and broad doubloons .
the infant aith , half - form'd , was crusht ;
for light'ning scap'd from its own proper place
with innocence and peace , advance , and sing ;
happit , _ covered _ .
through the cooling air of the glorious night .
the holly bears a berry
and fondled her caressing hand .
to whose faults she was blind,--
with mooning eddies and soft lips acurl ;
and the abbess wept so freely
curuata ceruice iubas pharsalia rura
and what man that foryet himselve ,
like it , no sign of life thou giv'st to me ;
again heap'd up , then down again ;
thy father 's , yea , and mine , once called , alas ! thy wife . '
so soople , he could gi'e a skelp wi't ,
closely to her throbbing bosom .
and the earth trembled when the stars were gone ;
my lulu , come an ' wa'k wid me . ' miss tidlum tidelum day . ' "
the flock obedient took themselves away;--
the king sal him axeth red ,
and that is to love and to cherish
i beg you would send me a letter by stealth :
" less yearning for the friendship fled ,
a curious frame of nature 's work ;
and as a friend now hold discourse with me ;
since love is life and wakes not thine ,
knew well that when the morning came
who showed more wit than ever schoolboy had ,
' there by hun and tartar harried--
each hour with self - denial fraught ;
so art thou , loved mary , to me .
his cap and coat are enough to note
ninety cities in it : the people speak many different languages
caina , and thou shalt not any see
he took out his pen and a nib he selected ,
each little indian sleepy - head
on the receipt of my mother 's picture
¡ cuán rica tú te alejas !
for all your pains -- one moment wait !
o'er human souls that languish for the light--
being then young and wry'd ,
" i suffered _ here_,--was _ here _ betrayed . "
so great in loneliness of grey despair ,
all were changed to bowls of silver !
and when they have made the shore through every shock ,
dans le bal incessant de nos étranges rues ;
dare , when others curse , to bless .
" yes , yes , by the stiching ' tis plain to be seen
comes each huge , strong beam ,
until at last up - rose the queen :
muscle and nerve like strings of steel ,
but breaks the harp - string with the sound ;
yet , ' midst these ills , permit me to complain ,
and peopled with their dreams .   the wind from fierce
but thou canst read it there .
how that will boot you time will teach . ”
that bring the fog and mist .
his brow was grave and his eye severe ,
that still help them to forget ,
bot rathere , if it mihte hir like ,
" love lives to die ! "
but now we gathered , spite of all the rich
so all day long till sundown
with scraps and snippets that to me
searched each thicket , dingle , hollow ;
inimus intra regiam salutis ;
i am like teng pai - tao ;
or the rippled green of ships
must buy a kiss — must buy a kiss . ’
i heard a young ploughman sae sweetly to sing ;
_ she , seriously : _
a city and rings . all his boast against thee
through the beauty of the summer ,
from rafter back to sill ,
_ maskin - pot _ , teapot .
mountains ,
heav'n , as thou knowest , i have power to shut
among their savage gorges and cold springs ,
not of wind , not of wind ,
was touched by what she said , her lovely voice .
claw , to scratch , to strike .
you can ease my heart , and do
lies which betray the strongest , god alone knows how .
old callow at the task of god ,
whirled along the fever - flood ;
ducem tuorum principum .
fretted with gold or silver:--by command ,
mistake of owning overmuch :
the breath of souls about us rolls ,
no , it was wonder , such as thrilled
but to sit in the dusk and spoon .
" you are weeping ; your footstep is heavy with care--
give me , that they may bear me to the heights
... or lingers it a vernal brook
combustion thro ' our boroughs rode ,
as , when the dust lies deepest on the roads ,
a writing , pedant ! dost demand from me ?
" and a drawing the corks of train - oil - flasks ,
hath chanced upon no ill , through goodly years ,
" i who would have consented to forego
" this is the hundredth
the last dull plunge was heard ,
as done to him what then was done for me ?
who stood behind the counter , and stand talking
or ever summer yields to winter 's frost .
" but surely one can do that sometimes ? "
suche oft complayne the charge of pouerte
that calkas traytor fled was , and allyed
that though a guilty head misguide the world ,
or he must fall and sleep without his fame ,
a silver singer far away ,
so fine a harvest daily reaps ,
now , what do you think ?
same ez richard slung his right across the
trade , the last earth - god ; whom the olympian power
his name and life 's brief date .
from mountain brow to desert base
i would so gladly walk therein ; but now
to the children of man--"take the world i now give ;
lady , very fair are you ,
for his unstinted gift of verse and wit .
hope , care , nor love , beyond , her heart beat here .
he tells about 'em , lots o ' times ,
thou power supreme , whose mighty scheme
seein ' wich way the tide thet sets to office is aturnin ' ;
where first i told thee all my secret sighs ?
dread weregeld for the compact ; blood for blood ! "
this life or that , was cause of causes , proved
and grasp'd a flinty mass , or else had fall'n ,
with no rose - coloured veil ' twixt it and thee--
rare in the younger poet . ]
though it have brought destruction on the world .
by three , by five they prance with pride
the lamentations of a widowed heart .
and hands of blended snow and scent ,
their tendance , or plantation for delight ;
why should you be so cruel to yourself ,
sal ridden taking line from dansey ;
if she be filled with love and scorn ,
all races from all lands .
gliding off behind the courser .
nay , thou wert hidden in that hollow hill
the only one you left me , o mother , the only one !
then from the east they greedily dart forth ,
in densest volume to the earth they pour
i sail toward the land where the breeze blows no more ,
when he 's wrong he is flat , when he 's right he ca n't show it ,
( he )   rabbit hop an ' long dog trot !
my glance had comprehended as a whole ,
to stretch your wing , which e'en to your desire
' so i spake , beseeching them in soft words , but they held
  [ the metaphor is derived from a hot spring which appears to boil
" why , no , " he faltered , then went on : " suppose
one flew hither , and one thither ,
her ancient sorrows to the cold white moon ,
" about it , goddess , and about it . "
there are hours
stead , on which they were both changed into stones . ]
a hundred steers ; and promis'd thousands more
sundered wide as seas can sunder
the old sweet - rocket sheds its fine perfumes ,
captured me these .
so high you stood without a peer ;
a fragrant bank of strawberries ,
el tronco , la flor y el ave :
and i reckon five oughts
her lord the sea a tribute wave .
surveying chimney - tops and roofs ,
a new - year 's gift i bring
" low fellow , you 've surely forgotten
porque en tan solemne fiesta
light to the rocks that roof'd them , which the sun
the falter of an idle shepherd 's pipe .
but this good draught which i have drunk
so , somewhat of the end o ' june
and coolly spout , and spout , and spout away ,
echoless , ignorant,--
yet ' tis well!--for precious is the rest ,
that highly respectable gondolier
it ill befits the mellow fig to grow .
besides a stout portfolio ripe
the star - spun sky shall shine !
they hear my unexpected knock .
cose we 's gwineter ' scuse merlindy ,
with incense , where the golden altar fumed ,
break the stiff sod , or freight the adventurous sail ;
down to the last hour of thy punishment ! "
the woodlands were ringing
light the gloom .
until my tears , still dropping , wear
with strains of ' cherry ripe ! '
b. f. graham , first a private ,
who stood in reverent attitude ,
molest her ancient solitary reign .
behold where , opening far away ,
a little in the late encounter strained ,
" here 's a strange time of night
within the dripping churchyard , the rain plashing on your stone ,
and plunging through deep brake ,
the beauty of the scheme of earth .
the fisher 's child ,
while yet he spoke , impatient of delay ,
and all things righted .
vol . i -- books i - vii
stand they , when dawn drags in ;
a sinner in a life of care .
and one betook him to the mountain steep .
hauberk asunder cleaves ; the blow , e'en through
from flight of darts away , but still again
for a day and a night and a morrow ,
this carry back , that it may not presume
and the white ship furrowed the water - way .
the rage increased in the cursed wight
thou art not my vassal nor i thy lord .
and clothed their boughs with green ;
amphimachus ; he , sounding , smote the plain ,
hurrah for the fun !
but in this age is writ another story ;
you 're not clogged with foolish pride ,
though it is not always the case , i believe ,
bold brow and wanton mouth were not all lust .
and uncles and antelopes act for the best ,
brought to the unborn ,
with nothing but blank sky and wounds that ache ,
naught now remains but scattered chips and sticks ,
cuando en la noche callada
alas , the path is lost , we can not leave
at worth an ' merit ,
untouched thy homed blossoms blow ,
on hill and dale and pleasant plain
to him then sped such tidings dread ,
could not through all the universe display
each with his armour , shall my sire convey ,
and the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling ;
this ancient city , far - renowned :
and spite of what i thought of her before
to a marching tune .
and to declare how pitiful he is
in each well ordered family ;
no larger wolf , i ween , apulia roams ;
wanted separate from his other works .
and the new nuptials of the trojan guest .
and green savannahs , she should share
something of the world - joy
the stagnation of a bank we could n't stand ;
far away from the spot of danger .
with courage fresh , then let us haste
and curst the hands by whom it first was made ,
epimetheus , or the poet 's afterthought
and the world - resounding thunders
these all are thy works , o , thou glorious being !
coarsely against the world 's great store of wealth ;
their names in this or t'other roman tribe ;
i have wondered why sad thou invokedst the gods , amaryllis ,
and some were hours of childish sorrow ,
thus rejoined to damayanti -- i to - morrow will behold . "
where not coarse trifles blot the page
whereby his ( isaac 's ) visitors might know ,
swift through her haunted fingers pass
nor partner of his banquet needs ,
a loaded raft with happy throngs
o talk not to me of a name great in story
from then till now the pilgrim 's vow
doth mortal live
the chiefest virtue noble ladies wear ,
saw the dust as it settled again : he stood there unheeding .
over the breaking waves,--
catch the breezes
i know .
where i cling .
or open wide at special rate
with a religious book or friend ;
stores we receiv'd ; our dearest hope in vain ,
let what will come to pass .
my muse dow scarcely spread her wing ;
the holy house which thou didst meekly grace ,
nor durst light paridel advance ,
against the horizon 's dim - discerned wheel
wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had , but
gave this answer to her question :
account of all the actions of the past .
for thanne this collacioun
when drunk , i 'd rate it at a barley - corn ;
soon appeared the tops of fir - trees ,
oh ! ever it lies -- it lies ,
ne’er shall his living promise be
its calm simplicity of grace ,
have never seen that long file of priests in their vestments ,
who are you , reader , reading my poems
be well paid if he will . i will give him a chariot and a couple
" ye faithful guardians of the herd and flock !
she half reclines , and upward lifts her face
trip it to the cricket 's tune
unhappy faust ! i know thee now no more .
to th'pagan says : " confound thee our lord god !
and stamped its cloven feet deeper into mr . spruggins .
that i may be matron and wife . "
the ox thou gavest to partake my care .
with such an eye at essex glanced !
personally identified him . when the wife had spoken the words of
" not yet , my lady . "
" joy sparkles to us from the bowl !
spirit of beauty , whose sweet impulses ,
to guard this priceless boon from hurt or stain--
strangely , too , was she transfigured .
and another arrow flying
cave where he was concealed from the fury of juno , was said to
- " i would not freeze thee , shorn one , " cried
forbidden fruit a flavor has
knowest thou the shore
and the head - sails fill to the blast once more :
the twentieth year is well - nigh past
when the lake ripples and the skies are blue
a proud and bitter smile
of its square , right - angle outlines ,
quit mocking of the song - bird 's note .
' twixt each attempt all was so still ,
here michael ceased , and to the fields went forth
this town and realm are all thine own ,
my heart , which by a secret harmonie
motionless are all the rivers ,
for all her life was love , and fears
syne say i was the fautor .
the emir has himself ten legions armed .
if within some hall or chamber ,
her virgin fancies , pouring forth more sweet ,
quantum una uaecors oenei partu edita .
thereafter let him woo some other fair - robed achaean woman
thee quickly , leader of the people ; he will surely declare
_ sale espèce de maquereau _ .
or senseless love or causeless ire ?
thou wilt not now repent .
that guards the central vapour - home of dark ,
" o race of tireless fighters , flushed with a youth renewed ,
with purest gold the bosses shone .
seemed all the labour of the coming day ,
a note or two at best .
lemminkainen , much dejected ,
and draw the king to thy retreat . ”
his king 's worst foe : nor he whose raging ire ,
of em'rald interlacing . there a little bloom
be here enacted first.----
" nay , i 'm but a stable - boy , " he smiled ,
{ * [ greek ] can hardly have a local meaning here . if
at will , just now and then ,
with eyes too tremblingly awake
but all his " hair " was cut in maine--
through the four - and - twenty crowned
at ease and at play :
midst the spring time 's rich profusion ,
are the wise ones who build houses in the bible . . . . "
j'avais septtans , elle était plus petite .
" knowest not , o king , the mansions
" nay , i do not need thy sword ,
irrita dona querens , sexu gauisa uirili
far off over the leagues of it ,
their warriors weltering on the plain ,
and overmaster by infesting blows .
wild wind , when sullen cloud
but jove in wisdom , as in years , the first .
in what strong heart doth the old manhood dwell ?
gruffly growled the wind on toller down , so bleak and bare ,
than reign our english queen . "
a very judgment , and her neighbours ' curse ;
' o tell her , swallow , that thy brood is flown :
this king tho with his wif constance ,
better were it had you sent me
when you envy , o how keenly , one poor tommy being cleanly
in arrogance right uncontrolled
and beautiful and wild ;
hurled by primeval earthquake shock
on the prairies of wainola ,
can utterly abolish or destroy !
me . often ere now , brother , has it happened that , in order to
to some unearthly music , and possessed
did he not swear upon the holy cross
i therefore scann'd him .   straight the teacher kind
swift - winged , swift - footed , of enormous girth ,
" thou from the confines of man 's nature yet
till morning spreads her rosy wings ,
lest i be shamed when i am dust again .
thou wovest dreams of joy and fear
why waste so vainly thy resplendence ?
i only meant to be so dear you could not let me go .
who with such care had reared the youthful knight .
told how pined his gentle daughter -- for the sovereign of men .
is blowing round me , that desire 's sweet glow
and here comes a chopper to chop off your head . _
but my banjo am done broken ,
then blank and gone and still , and utterly lost .
to burn it here , for , oh ! ' twouldst make me blue
fill the deep - mouthed glasses high !
old rumour in the world proclaims them blind ;
the flame that makes all eyes , though diamond - bright ,
ut uarias usus meditando extunderet artis
-- his sister i -- against whatever wight
amidst the gray ,
bring the rain upon his head .
like bandied balles , into the firmament .
that use in london town .
findeth place , some homes there be
the knights come riding two and two :
chant their dirge , and their chieftain honor .
for he destruide the mirour ;
i thou hast suckled , mother , i at last
him and themselves they harry and confound . "
o sall i marrie the nut - browne bride ,
and prepared to sail his vessel ,
then his good mother answer'd his speech in a sensible manner
while answering alleys , as they speed ,
now , as they tacked north - west , the sullen roar
jarvis had recognized the fall of the trunk , and in the one quick
these shouted :   " first they died , to whom the sea
lxxiii . in front , a massive gateway threats the sky ,
went to destroy them -- i amid the rest,--
no unribb'd pinnace , no self - sparing pilot .
would hear thine own heart beating
hecla glow
the li - on beat the u - ni - corn all round a - bout the town .
to act like hypocrites , and thieves , and liars .
and yet -- god knows -- it is the best we can ;
whose verse in manhood 's pride sublimely flows ,
a happy wife , although she led
you who never once have missed her
leabin ' me ter cry en groan
our candidate at length gets in ,
and this does not taste bitter .
within the shadow of this gloomy peak
now rings the woodland loud and long ,
of indolent flesh impeded this man 's strength .
the sunny day is changed into the storm ,
each rapt unendingly beyond the other ,
wal , arter i gin glory up , thinks i at least there 's one
we must not tarry long ; the dawn is nigh . "
i 'll tell you another
“ expect to view . oft in the eastern skies ,
when not subservient to the body base .
and hang you up stiff on a hook , tom noddy ,
your slave for ever , at your feet i die
and all along the valley , by rock and cave and tree ,
in a rosy sleep along the floor
i do not know this man of whom ye speak !
best of ascetics , part in bliss :
a frail , fragile thing , and i prized it too much ,
ráhu(988 ) the dreadful dragon shines .
the music and the doleful tale ,
i venture at all , -- while my avarice regards
above the golden holes .
out of three thousand gallant knights
the boors with whom he talk'd , the country - spots he knew .
never had i the fortune to welcome guests so dear . "
or the rooks , with busy caw ,
lo , it is a good thing to list to a minstrel such as him ,
all very agreeable girls -- and none
goes to never - pleasant lapland ,
the artists ; next , the trades ; and after came
exactly had the kind of face
desire of joy beats mightily pulsing forward
" if i believed that my reply were made
cattle on the meadow a - charging with a roar !
he schal receive on of the tuo .
the why and how .   i do not care ,
spake the ancient wainamoinen :
there were wolves in the woods
like the groves of the peaceful gods was his land,--
for he sees the peerless city -- rome !
possible source of sonnet , 267 .
how that which in maud was native grace
with the rhythm of majesty -- careless of cumber--
were greased with blood . they swept the seas
who flourished from the twelfth to the fourteenth centuries .
unmeaning , soft , resistless things ;
this flirting disgraces a man !
or aught that wad belang thee ;
on a british hill or brook ;
as beauties the ----nds are at present the rage ,
of the book she is reading , and starts out to find
and those to virtuous thoughts inclined
to the summit of heaven the clouds
soul - centered , when the rule of flesh is past .
come ill , come well , whate'er betide ,
( we , wretched mortals ! lost in doubts below ,
she felt the chaplet round her maiden locks
wings that wave , and angel glory nigh ,
country , faring hardly , with an old woman to look after him and
within the clachan .
the ultimate preservation of his poems depended on a single copy ,
from sacred elis . four unrivall'd steeds
as thou wert constant in our ills , be joyous in our joy ,
þaȝ þay be iolef for ioye , ionas ȝet dredes ,
years pass -- approach , pale questioner -- and learn
et claro siluas cernes aquilone moueri .
and now and then , perhaps , there swells
the sheik is dreaming in his tent ,
library of the ptolemies was destroyed .   400,000 volumes are
while coofs on countless thousands rant ,
i find myself arrived , and crave repose .
oh , hasten ! oh , let us not linger !
came , day by day , in larger shoals ,
" woe is me , ill - fated maiden !
beside our sacred hearth - stones ,
and still looked high , as if he planned
the moon rains out her beams , and heaven is overflow'd .
therefore more plain areade * this doubtfull case . "
the gas - lamp flickered away to a sputtering blue star ,
a dish of honey and a glass of wine ,
go past us in the daily mart ,
and woful trees by many a dusky stream
travels with greater celerity , with more unexpectedness , but
who blessed the bread and wine .
can forget;--
attent once more in looking round about ,
and seems to one in drowsiness half - lost ,
when passing by ye reade these wofull layes
i throw into oblivion 's sea the sword
lament my lot , and tell your fellow - swaines
and loathed idle sound .
trundling a hurdy - gurdy , gay
bud t’biggest bulk o ’ brass at ’s left ,
jaybird answer : " what 'd you say?--
found not discharge ; and from the very banks
and thy grizzle of white , and thy crippleness , come
blake was mad , they say , -- and space 's pandora - box
of man , but fled him , or with count'nance grim
these book - men , when they catalogue their books ,
with carnage dyed , atrides urg'd their flight .
continues fighting -- he kills pandarus and wounds aeneas -- venus
and the light of the morrow shall see thee my bride . "
after the common way , take sun and rain ,
against the burden of that voice what tyrant power shall stand ?
for men of noble blood to bear than death !
almost a textual quotation from one of the letters of henry
he left the camp by the sundown light ,
souls of all the sea - dogs , lead the line to - day ! _
the major 's on the flank ,
you see me coming . as of old i 'm still
or sight of vernal bloom , or summer 's rose ,
may lie till seven ;
you will not catch me reading any more ;
some the ocean currents carried .
her lowing hot to the fresh gale ,
of a kail - runt .
rinaldo was their leader , lord and guide .
they say there ’s no delay
no doubt with the annual gifts to greet him .
the crescent blazed behind
i must nedes holde upon thy syde
it is the mighty ocean , whither tends
and mute as any fish .
as if the milky way their feet was under
they 'd journey far from grove and glen
and he falls in the gutters of sin .
keep his magic head from danger
crop the pale herbage round each other 's bed ,
then answered mary , " this shall never be ,
gaze again into her kind eyes , gaze into them , weary poet ,
in the midst a form divine!{34 }
with a leash of straining hounds : and the foam - born .
  for a list of the icelandic versions , see heusler , _ die gelehrte
o heart that knew no fear !
their prism colors , violet and red ,
then , by the path the hermit showed ,
he 'd give consent they should we d together .
how all unutterably sweet she seems . . . .
with blasphemy , sedition at the rim ,
kept all the feast days , went to mass , communion ,
who leads a good life is sure to live well .
not the greatest , nor the smallest ,
he showed ( the trick is nowise new )
a moment on the sighing shrouds .
--and this beside , if you will not blame ;
v. 26 .   on this fifth lodgment of the tree . ]   mars , the fifth ot
my dearest samuel , through life 's scenes
we should see the spirits ringing
o , then we awoke with sudden start
( o juno , hadst thou seen her , less thy ire ! )
of the undulant shade where the sycamores lean
as he is hideous now , and yet did dare
so far , they shall return no more
--who listen'd to his voice , obey'd his cry ?
and mountain - heads is one ,
in division called short .
madcap , what jest was this , to meet me here ?
are not within the crimson city ta'en
but is an affluence of your grace;--
the guides whoop'd .   the band was obliged to alight ;
with shutting caesar out they shut him in !
dear to his country by the names
we stopped at nairn , for golf links famed ,
in tune to the slow , sweeping bows , and retreats and advances ,
i killed cock robin . "
of voices over nuts and wine
a lady so gay ,
the angel 's wings had fallen , stone on stone ,
concocted to deceive us .
they could not choose but hear .
they gave a pardoned crook a vote , but had n't one for me ;
and trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries ,
ere ye forth
our breath knows nought but east and west .
the wounded place ; my touch can heal
prosper my passage ) phthia the deep - soil'd
_ lum _ , the chimney ; _ lum - head _ , chimney - top .
upon his majesty 's coming to holmby
and art departed long before thy prime .
was progeny born , a pleasing family of promising young
" now who art thou , that cleavest through our smoke
without the master touch of faith and pain .
have mended all the rents their arrows cleft
that hath not loved and heard ;
wi ' creepin ' pace .
measures the circuit of the boundless sky ?
but here beyond the circle , where there 's neither right or wrong ,
and owre the yard he ran ,
who says that we shall pass , or the fame of us fade and die ,
" ha , i 'll have it still , " cried he ;
and i can well assure you , that scarce few hours were past ,
he ate , and he must die !
went forward to greet the strangers civilly , thought their
as if its sleepy wavelets dreamed
and the stars overhead are a marching throng ,
whether in the boiling torrent ,
yea , more than years upon a throne
hope , thou bold taster of delight !
more likely to have emanated from an athenian synod of compilers
he had gone forth among the new - dropp'd lambs ,
to the learned and eloquent .
steed , elephant , and man , and chief ?
with thy love tight about ; and no death will be ;
pretty quick you 'll change your tune ;
truth that shines on every heart ;
defied the baffled storm .
with naked walls and pillars freezing cold ,
look on this world of yours with opened eyes !
high fame was hers , as [ ' s]iva 's faithful wife .
while elephants and deer he slays ,
from comrades viewless unto strained eyes ,
meanwhile , whate'er of beautiful , or new ,
but do n't be vexed beyond all measure .
were in my bosom swelling :
flesh over his whole body ; she bleared his eyes , which were
sobir , benyng , and full of mansuetude
my company , and none durst stand and face the foe , for
a dirge -- and nanna and her train replied .
when i have seen by time 's fell hand defaced
and all about me fruited orchards grew
else he was seldom bitter or morose .
to dog his footsteps all about
on the poor ship he thinks .
his spear in shivers falls ; his ample shield
may one kind grave unite each hapless name ,
around him throng'd his fellow - warriors bold ,
whate'er it be , from whence arise for him
carv'd in that old and simple age , when still
these were also given
yet oh , of life and uplift what a symbol and a sign !
withouten prop or pillour it t'upholde ,
i will not tell nor show thee who i am ,
attend , my duties to commence.--
to the proof have put your patience ,
the rich trader shook his head , and the pigtail behind it -- such a
" why mak'st thou no attempt at questioning ,
we stood , expecting farther speech , when us
shoot on him shafts of quietness , that he may ever keep
that levere him were forto save
upon the third , when now , near eventide ,
again , why never hurtles jupiter
of the sovereign of nations !      read me not as a penance !
by rude commotion torn ,
as it mingles its requiem with the widow 's cry .
if there had been no chicken skin ,
spare my luve , ye winds that blaw ,
qui sibi semitam non sapiunt , alteri monstrant uiam ,
as i do -- try again . "
there the castle stood up black with the red sun at its back--
and seems to shake the spheres .
with a waist and with a side
that sail'd this dried - up desert sea . " ...
undique nitendo corpus discerpere ferro :
that secret power by all obeyed ,
sheep of his thronging flocks , and his kine with trailing
of art is called the equator , and remains
just so it was with that poor christian brother ,
and the exemplar go not in one fashion ,
for elenor murray , thought the moral hunt
princedoms in heaven ; yet are of love so full ,
and the drums strike more convulsive ,
the rain shook the canvas , unheeded ; aloof ,
nor work smoking - caps for cousins
to serve , humane and kind to her waiting - women and servants , not
prisoners free for bribes .
should i go presently .   let the word fall ,
when beauty comes to passion 's trysting - ground .
to meet their due regard;--nor e'en prevail
the rich forget their state and the charms o ' wealth and power ,
xlv . thence , burning , to messapus ' camp he speeds ,
each one a lovely light :
when to battle fierce came forth
the severed hearts ' familiar ties ;
i always murmur ' damn ! '
with a bill like two great paddles ,
high there a lord was seated , / astold the name he bore ,
and two from the north and west ,
hypocrisy elaborate and rampant .
fastidious , or else listless , or perhaps
and from her snow - white palette 's dyes
and with the vision broken was her rest .
or noble music with a golden ending .
but mark , dear goddess , this my master - piece ,
gazing , gazing , till from ocean
thou'lt find me again " ( the forest heart stirred ) .
cursed be the glare of apparition
" will the advancing waves obey me , bishop , if i make the sign ? "
who , living in the faith and dying for it ,
none other my world is adorning ;
divinely stand , not knowing yet against us
wild days in a pampero off the plate ;
the epigrams bearing the title of xenia were written by goethe
reck well my rede !
o love ! o my own love , found but to be lost !
" ' fliest thou , loved shade , while i thus fondly mourn !
turn roun ' an ' nen lay down again .
for friend or foe ; to succour , not to harm .
noble deucalion was to minos born ,
so spake the king of gods , and straightway rose ,
be silent still , and fear not lest my voice
from flame and weapons thousandfold against our goings bent ;
but on a day she said to irma leese :
comes a lambkin from the furnace ,
his only virtue that he did not hide
heartily know ,
new worlds to inherit .
no easy faith your equal judgment blinds .
how gleams the bower with countless dyes !
here , where haply some woman dreamed ( are those
to pastoral dales , then set with modest farms ,
with your claws the openings widen ,
that you may tend upon him with the prince . '
whom answer'd thus lycaon 's noble son :
whose own ' hermit ' , as was pointed out to the present editor by
where , having won the profit which they seek ,
to avoid great errors , must the less commit :
and shattered with the fall , i stand alone .
a fear , vague , and formless , and horrible , ran
the awful grandeur of the vast machinery ;
who lunged with failing point but fierce ,
belonged originally to the dwarfs .   piper , i , 50 , interprets
and lived with all his sisters where
die züge , die ihm teuer sind .
and swords gold - hilted--
whose left hand honours with decay and death .
by substituting lath and plaster ?
affection beyond the grave             _ green locust . _
with clasped hands your liegeman be ,
noble , yet no one would my servant be :
blind with thine hair the eyes of day ,
that beareth death of men in hand , or bar the homeward road :
approaching in the distance ,
all the earth below her
since this poor covert where i pass the night ,
and therefore _ oates _ has well deserv'd
with silken knot ,
i had seen the look of old !
on god eternal , very god ! see me ! see what thou prayest !
and yet to him the palm we give
and mighty rents in many a cavernous error
says proudly:--"wretch , to me thy threats are vain !
scarce had the sun arose in all his glory ,
and let thy holy feet visit our clime !
brought memories on noiseless feet ,
shine thro ' poisoned vials of age
papa said , " what an owl you are !
of my old father , nor return of love ,
--   triphylla ,
one cleft the chariot yoke in two ,
but i know , i know , that it 's down below
amid their army 's dreadful glare
and next those goads to evil deed apply ;
in thy divine contentment dwells !
us with marigolds in lieu of english grass .
his reign of peace upon the earth began :
to bite with fierce teeth through the prisoned limb
the salary indeed is very low , being but two hundred & fifty
those at his mercy,--why , they please him most
an ' the ten - foot ditch beside .
my soul shrank back aghast .
" that young , stiff - necked , reviling town
and nature smiles opposite , stanfield he copies it ;
why you talk so slow ?
that in this trunk inhabits .   thus the law
oh , dule on the poortith o ' this countrie ,
upon the hearth . no thing shall stay .
throng her inventions , which shall go before .
what mail the naked savage heart to shield ?
now my heart is full of glee
i shall demand perfect men and women out of my love - spendings ,
then turn to wakeful prayer and worthy act .
so little hop - o'-my - thumb made mints of money ,
a hunter 's low - born son was he,--
veiled by the mist were my golden romances .
till the stockings will hold no more ;
low to her lover whispered venus ,
that nou on daies thou schalt finde
“ were but thy infant born;--two now in one
our shelter and our canopy ,
if i should fail the cross , is thine . "
that can justify experiments on dogs .
with all the scorpions that should whip this age .
and when he reached the midst of the sea
lo , all our pomp of yesterday
and i to lift with playing
with his tail cocked up ?
are desolate where death his shroud has flung
reasoning is that operation of the sensorium by which we
and eyes like sea or sky .
he ’d rob if he ’d a chance .
ten pound was all the pressure then -- eh ! eh!--a man wad drive ;
where nations dwell , children of early time ,
as through the wood sir launcelot rode by
  appeared originally in ' delights ' of 1646 ( pp . 132 - 3 ) , and was
i should call on genius , art , and use , i could not tell it so
and weltering oceans and trailing streams ,
by which its commerce i extend
the moments glide away ;
the earth gave way , the skies rolled round ,
to the market - square of peshawur town .
what looms in the west released ?
ashamed , afraid of strife ,
viewed the light clouds with vacant look ,
under the eaves .
the orgy waxes riotsome--
but each bright drop remains apart :
blow , blow your pipes !   and from afar
that , at the very sight , their foemen shook .
that you did hear them say ? "
and joy'd to see how well he fed ;
the streets are full of lights and loves ,
“ and that alone my brother shall enjoy .
of mourners to bedew the soil
our stinging kerne of aspect stern
but tendrils of old nature , herald sprays !
but join’d , repel not hector ’s fiery course .
it rises and falls with the waves ' rhythmic motion ,
yet would his lust know no restraints ,
as from his makers hand , he sprung to day .
i felt as if i could n't go that fur ,
were mingled together in her breast .
in hoary cranreuch drest ;
before you bid the curtain fall .
dried them at the hour of noon - day ,
said , " ladies , allow me to offer a word
reaped sheaf and ruined fruit ,
from twisters up to punkin - pies !
and one pale maiden vainly tries
" alas ! i feel i am no actor here ! "
spake these words to lemminkainen :
while still they hoped much , though small they gained ,
their jests were coarse , and swift their coursers ,
i thought my heart could haud nae mair ,
a feeble , wavering line .
the pride and glory of his fellow - men !
and skeleton for vengeance cries ,
for the cuckoo he missed ,
" have from the flood lay hid there may not be
moteua , xv , 4 . perhaps from _ itoa _ , to say , " it is said . "
single with like defence , wherever met ;
so i left him there and i started back .
slaying othryoneus , who , by the lure
the ways of men are distant brought ,
might not have thought the scanty draught so sweet
like precious stones or gold .
long column stretching dark thro ' weeds and moss ,
kindled between them , with resentment fired
thus , after view of all the indies store ,
my fearless strength will still prevail .
through the mist o ' my tears ,
swift sports through the air on purpose , and that i shall one day
the antique temple of the armed zeal
my thatched cottage has eight or nine rooms .
their traitorous trueness , and their loyal deceit .
was there any way whereby to refuse , for the people 's voice
should be taken down and carted :
but the naughty painted ladies ,
world .   the number of thy tribe , thy sons and daughters , shall be
learning exalts her head , the graces smile
within the castle , in a sumptuous room ,
if , best of those who keep the right ,
and all their gentle sleepy flock
her soft dress brushed against him as he passed her ;
and then i remembered the faith divine
not sunrise with its flaring spokes of light ,
esteemed almost as the equal partners with their husbands in the
when achaia 's deputy spoke--
while dwindles , moon - white , through the dusk
our vales , like those of death , a darkness show
like to the falling of a star
the weakly blossom , warm in summer bower ,
_ a true story _
and none of them have guessed that the deflection in the line
nay , surely nought so dull as this the souls within us are ,
the hurrying wrack with such a blood - red glare ,
to keep up good fellowship still ,
now why , i would ask , should i puzzle my brain
it !   a song from tommy !   a song !   a song ! "
possibility and its necessity .
of craving more , so in conceit be rich ;
i have staked with my god for truth ,
in mocking grin , death pass upon a steed
by the editor of " hints for the table . " fcp . 8vo . 1s . 6d . cloth .
then , to accomplish all my soul 's desire ,
in snugness may compare .
he dreamt of the pretty toys ;
waken my love with dawn ,
the next joy , which was already known to me as an illustrious
chiefs at their wine . and nausicaa , dowered with beauty by
the furthest pillar in thy realm advance ;
enter each and all , and use their service ,
out - breste , and he to werken in this wyse
wherewith you make those merry scenes ,
since none of them are mine .
and ráma and brave lakshmaṇ , who
for when the lash no longer leaves its blows ,
and those who paint them truest , praise them most .
unto his goal and victory plods ,
and can not understand .
_ sakhī : _   measureless virtue ! whereso yearning bodies meet--
who thought to mingle with his betters !
she will have won the victory in vain ;
sleeves _ still _ worn ( which _ i _ think is wise ) , _ à la
you boast of me at christmas cheer ;
" aye , wind , i ken them weel eneuch , and fine they fa ' an ' rise ,
but i saw his eyes as he looked at her .
five kisses , one unto a place :
exchange the royal robe and crown i wear
and with sore passion and ambiguous strife
my sweetest lesbia , let us live and love ( campion )
the obscuration upon earth .
while she sits in her low - backed car ,
thou by so many circumstances only
centre , which were found in a nest with their tails grown
she that star overhead in slow descent :
beholding rome and all her noble works ,
and pray for that poor mortal one .
on ware unsound , for want of wit .
" this is thangbrand , olaf 's priest . "
than batavia the ape ?
the torment vanished days have known .
will be there with the others until our number corresponds with
the warbling woodland , the resounding shore ,
the bloated moon
meantime achilles with his pond'rous spear
i , a brave man , with the abominable ?
praeceps aerii specula de montis in undas
long , long may prayer and praise be thine !
and sharp and eager driveth on the storm
" i 'll go and order him out , be the consequences what they may .
so it may see .
and took a book i had ,
which the proud english further doth prouoke ,
of his love that is mighty to save ;
action -- claimed by men , a multitude ? "
without they girdled her , made nest within .
that their glad eyes had seen the rites divine ,
a spouse more meet than one like her :
la menken strove to be , and could not be ,
“ by telephus , the virtue of my spear .
_ vidyāpati says : how may you pass _
a middle - aged lyrical poet is supposed to be taking
and he was present , and from observation
a murmur of voices , a reek of smoke ,
among the tasks of real life , hath wrought
you bless me , then you turn away your head--
thro ' dreaming towns i go ,
and showers a deluge from his demon - wings .
in kind accomplishment;--but o ! how bright
to stay the mischief on nebraska 's plains ?
no cloud upon the faces there ,
all its path is fairy ground .
ye sun - born virgins ! on the road of truth .
how months ago , when up the hill ,
the boisterous wind of the world to resist ,
we can not cry to god as once we cried !
in their hearts .   each night i had to tell
into the middle of the seventeenth century ; where they fill a
the island still is purple with plums ,
frederick has married , as we hear ,
will make her life her thanks . '
a car triumphal : on two wheels it came
  38 . = cankering thing.= what does canker do ?
into ae chamber they were laid .
to wit , the bounding billy - cock .
is it a little thing that she has wrought ?
and so on , to the last .
bear back unto the marble room and on the pillows streak .
when they found him with the dead ,
for long there was a whining in her ears
rura serit dulcis musamque inducit in arua .
in your simple , oval frame
the teint of blood is seen . rapid in rage
peace comes to them on quiet feet ,
alone by the fireside with elbows on knees
“ my inward flames.--by chance more tender words
' not for thee , and not for others ,
and voyage , wraithlike , to its cloud - hung rim ,
an old man dwells , a little man ,
rise , rise , rise !
the hand of sorrow touched me ,
to rob the tigress of her game .
and both they blode and body mar and wast
we will go , go , go .
' return no more to your woodland height ,
in the young life that round us leaps and laughs ,
step after step , feeling thee close beside me ,
twelve men , all equipped , having each his rest and his matchlock ,
no clouds , at sunset , die in airs as bright .
a learned friend some subtler reason brings ,
momentary respite , so with
and bacon ( which makes full the meal ) ,
_ with whom do i waltz , flirt , or talk ? _
and left behind the panting chase .
kiss the altar and confess
you and i are twined together so .
inwrought with gold , attir'd . beauteous her form ,
and only of thyself a judge severe ;
the fact of life with dependence placed
i always wanted to make a clean breast of it :
one breathes her magic in my song .
what profyted the myghty edefyces :
though injured past forgiveness , as men deem ,
where oran 's king , and king sobrino lay ;
to look on it e'en fancy does not dare.--
to watch the moonlight on the wave
and lodged here till the afternoon .
and while i understand and feel
the parents , nothing both , gave as desired
three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned
thou dost smile ,
uriel , and raphael , his vaunting foe ,
lightly they sweep ,
or kiss more cheeks than one ?
sets my melodious maro , whom she bred ,
an undertone of laughter ;
because my honor must be saved , and thine .
behold the deeds that are done of mrs . jones !
he is too old .
in spite of sorrow ; for respect is due
e'en into strangers ' arms her favorite gave--
roȝly , roughly , b. 433 . is it an error for _ rwly _ , sorrowful ?
and bootless home with empty ships hath gone ,
feast on the quiet face denied to me .
" o aias , mighty - souled , why was thine heart
he heard a sweet song just begun
under the eaves , conferring drowsily ,
bumblebees come ,
i see thee in the light that seeks
but , ah ! what land was this he woke unto ?
no unadorned and humble guest
leans to the field and scatters on the clover
a governed heart , thinking no thought but good ,
the answer came with a laugh and a song,--
thou art music to mine ear ,
of truest temper , which he will impart
here 's a little wadset , buittle 's scrap o ' truth ,
affirm the spirit , the eternal i -
and legends walk about ,
the warders with their shoes of felt
her swarthy skin is the devil 's art .
from the tips of white - swan feathers ,
his skin is brilliant with the nimble flood
and talked to them so oft ,
and it quotes a grave prophecy somebody made .
mephistopheles ( _ dancing with the old one _ )
and heavy darkness lays her leaden wings
will keep their course through every ill ,
in his path he paused to wonder
xlvi . the second prize to helymus , the third
rose , bird - like , from some hidden place ,
shaking , i reached the town -- and turned -- in trust --
who steals from his nest in the cypress trees ,
i have been up the spluegen , and on the stelvio also :
stanza lx . line 1 .
at random yeilded up to their misrule ;
her life out hour by hour , that he might know .
to where a dooli lay ,
to party claims
thy rejoicings to the couches ,
when souls prefer the dark . "--
the thin and silver moon ,
and would you rear a mulberry grove ,
extends o'er half the level mead ,
_ soldier , sailor , in what a plight i 've been !
in the snare of the lonely ambush ,
" o she lives , i say , and i here ,
praedam rictibus ambit incruentis .
its incomes and out - going , and _ then _ comes
the city of the smoky fray ;
if he some scheme , like tea an ' winnocks ,
where the water - lilies floated ,
by faith and hope immortal .
" and who so els that sits in highest seate
he ceased : and tárá starry - eyed
beside the churchyard yew ,
a storm of shell and shot
convinced that virtue only is our own .
' twas there her limbs the weary damsel spread ,
e'en i unsafe : the queen in doubt to we d ,
of right and of wrong :
families by tens and dozens ,
' yesterday the king of the brown world
for the march , reads which the impediment well .
till the night
clear , placid leman ! thy contrasted lake ,
of a hundred thousand escaped but one--
star filled with glory to our view ,
thus old with woes my fancy paints him now !
could angels be blest ? )
thou didst contemn those tombs of costly fame ,
and love grown cold ,
with latent heroes sack'd imperial troy .
knee - deep in improbable grass .
by the spear of periclymenus , his warlike
more sane than the helm of tamerlane ,
our master ’s order we fulfil ;
and after murder'd , need is not i tell .
i think their praises all so rude
nude breasts of cytherea , famous fair ,
yellow wine in tall goblets .
her earnest eye did make him more amaz'd :
the wind - god ’s power , his son and heir .
thou know'st , o moon , the bitter power of love .
from this , o first hath into human hearts
and by these several mirrors seen to be
was ruin to the doctor ; for the hound
so saying , he traversed with quick pace the trench
to fathom nature ( ill attempted here ! )
as knowing now not what to do !
according to old use and honours paid ,
will break their hearts ere bitted and made ,
that draw back baffled but to hurl again ,
new self and nobler me
all night , like it , my wide eyes watch and burn ;
unworthy of thy giant race ?
the deil may start on the rampage ; -
" crack wi ' me at e'en . "
when hanging out the clothes ,
the third is naso ; lucan is the last .
and there she wept and sigh'd fill sore ;
the scarlet flowers bravely grow
" he only asks a more propitious hour ,
the hills , the high , far - reaching sussex hills ?
mantle over him , which he had ever by him for a change of
the perfect form of every tree
the sight of faces , and the touch of hands ,
and every feather ruffled .
we are they that go , that go ,
the quest by other champion might be sought .
{ 9 }   " blink sae brawly , " glance so bravely .
those , again , of tricca and the stony region of ithome , and they
smote , and err'd not , his greave beneath his knee
he would venture his all to the boisterous sea .
thy hapless lover on the verdant green ,
with beauty , grace , that well might vie
lest if thou longer stay
yet he murmured so sad and so thrilling ,
seems like an echo from the ruined past ,
for the land that gave him birth .
here all night on the dunes
of the cheek , half averted and droop'd .   the rich bosom
_ except _ one of the _ pension'd train _ ,
to warn thee from the rocks and shoals of wrong ,
you answered , slightly frowning ,
ferst thei ben harde , and thilke assisse
that flutters everywhere ;
so eros shakes my soul , my life , my form .
shop - door and followed them up the creaking stairs .
the blessed memory of thy worth
" listen , " she cried , " sisters , daughters of nereus , that you may
wrinkle and secret of you , all your life ,
and covering with her white veil 's lucid folds
can in his swaddling bands control the damned crew .
and we give you deathless fame .
and those sounds that us affright
when lovers meet , should stand opposed in wars !
the half - retreating sound of water breaking ,
haply , no more our english home
son - in - law to me , her mother . "
the wronged client ends his laws
assist us : but if much converse perhaps
we find our lonely cot .
llegan , huyen , se levantan
vineyard or tilth , where his day - labour lies :
and the divine new births as well ,
to view the place , on land awhile us set ,
ere six strong hands laid gripe upon his throat .
down the dim , voiceless valley -- alone !
then bade them leave the loftier scene awhile ,
to humbler functions , awful power !
tow'rd earth and fights of men ; and at their side
lord of a narrow wilderness ,
the case itself is very nice--
or mus'd where limpid streams once hallow'd well ,
and seinin ' wuz allowed ! )
that thou hast separated all aright ,
as some fond sire who ten long winters grieves ,
and natheles yit forth withal
then while his plaid he round him cast ,
wher as me faileth ate laste
where my voice rings , fall and perish ,
see ! the shaggy pelt doth grow
but to subdue petronius ' mal - de - mer
' o psyche , ' thus , and kissing her he cried ,
a deeper , truer red .
i look'd afar , and saw no sign of wrack .
oceans have roll'd where mountains now aspire .
that master 's art , who in himself so loves it
and this is the message i 've taken for mine:--
for all is not bass that is bottled ,
capt . m. not lots , and they are n't some of us .
with the smudge - fire alight in the distance ,
and upon the road to guide us ?
for if peaceful you would slumber ,
is the dramatic sonnet , by which i do not mean merely
with bay and rosemary
buds unfold "                 florence earle coates
there to perish by judgment meet ,
and for the many sins of israel .
there find i personal themes , a plenteous store ,
means to give one 's soul to gain
could hire us to go higher ! "
is full , where is the need for weighing ?
await thy steps , thy march pursue ;
take this horse and ride home
of that true rome , wherein christ dwells a roman
he soon could write with the pen : and from that time ,
their blood has washed out their foul footsteps , pollution .
at her heels , on the table bounced up with a bound .
marster , an ' coat , an ' all ;
“ saw me and lov'd : persuasive words in vain
who at zulpich , like a tempest ,
and drench’d in royal blood the thirsty dart .
if so , by striking from the calendar
at such a curious earth !
how could you follow o'er hill and mere ?
so ’ midst the dogs and hunters ’ daring bands ,
there she sees , on the horizon ,
' come from heaven high . '
“ now al be to þat prynceȝ paye . ”
his soul stretched tight across the skies
on the red brick wall
canawon goronwy , gwrdd gynnired gwyth ,
throned in the seats the brave may reach
and saw and touched his lifeless frame ;
the fury of our giant foes .
down a new - made double grave .
the prospect made them glad ;
flicker through the greenish lamplight
characteristics of kabîr 's genius that he was able in his poems
what time from chiron stealthily his mother
then through the camp they shar'd the ev'ning meal .
of tulips blazed , a proper vestibule
the stars in the far - off heaven
what had she left ? revenge !   revenge ! was there ;
limbs that we left in the house of circe ,
and sword in hand upon afric 's passes
del helado invierno ,
nor poops nor prows does roland more descry ,
to heaven -- where hearts are not sincere .
" _ what place is this , and who are they ? _
i do confirm that jephtha vow :
at last hee came vnto _ diegoes _ caue
a cord . the deed minerva pitying saw
and mourneth as it wears .
the clinkum - clank o ' sabbath bells
after completer dreams ,
" behold the mighty army ! " moath cried ,
and then , you bet your boots , you 'll see
fain had my good lord burleigh solved the thing ,
i am her serviture , she is my soverane ;
the waves have a story to tell me ,
that ancient one of the magic arts was aweary , then at last
plac'd in that fair recess , in color all
the conic - point that meets the skies
" is lost , and thereto lost
oh , what joyous days i 've had , full , fervid , gay , glad !
thy feet are planted on the smallest sphere ,
but he instilled it first into my heart
thus -- with your favor -- soft , with a reverent hand ,
the child fell smitten on a rock ,
bark helmets guard them , from the cork - tree peeled ,
reached down to catch , while striving not to hear .
nor can i pour my current to the sea ,
besa á la niña ,
if chance a rapid torrent to the sea
erudite measure in spanish verse for four centuries , and
and knead its meal of gold .
for my soul but despises the glittering gold , and i 've
so there we stood and let the berries go ,
then from his side the weapon tore to hurl ;
rutulian sucro was the first that trojan onset stayed ;
did julia 's warm affections twine
‘ nay , for god , ’ than sayd robyn ,
is loveliest of all ;
when the king and the prince might journey home :
and every night , as was his wonte to done ;
he leads them to the height
jehovah 's body - guard -- the gibborim .
resplendent drudwas -- glittering as it goes
and fight for thee their sanguine battles o'er .
and from the empty wine - vat , as yet damp vapours wave .
one of her brothers and her mother were .
unless he deviate .   no bugle call
scilicet haec ratio vestri diadematis : hoc est ,
viceroy in his brother 's stead . in vain the old king pleaded ; the
voluminous - ringed , about his heart of ice ,
where shall i procure the harp - strings ? "
justine , you love me not !
as you speed from star to star .
to keep the stars and stripes on high .
hand to shake and mouth to kiss ,
yet i bid them " merry morn "
to be understood with the reservation
of her eyes and of her arms ,
the spurs upon their feet they lace ;
of unreplying matter , so this course
by rocks , and shelter'd close from ev'ry wind .
we plant , upon the sunny lea ,
he who shall say , " lo ! i have slain a man ! "
when gone the mists our human passions raise ,
miriam suddenly veered round upon him .
lane , on the winding earn there stands
( not with a better word to move
help you may talk him over , for it is good to take a friend 's
the village - girl at her wheel .
which are combined with them , require to be also immersed in
such gentle calm replies .
with a sory chere ,
all night long they thought of it ,
frank -- ay ; because ' tis late to talk in riddles
as to send him beelzebubbing ;
rose up and clad herself . slow went the day ,
mandant , ut ad se provocet simonidem ;
the furrowing tears had mark'd her rouged cheek ;
in double duty say your prayer :
stupendous architect ! thou , thou art all !
birds that can not even sing--
out mildly in the desert . do not seek
our eyes must have wept at the same hours ,
i can blow you strong , my brother !
would but the god of golfers ere too late
that till we see what 's what in fact , we 're far
the foolish hie them post - haste through ,
the sluggish blood in the old man 's veins
to thee the laurels belong
he said that he could neither eat nor sleep
stones from the land of india display'd each gorgeous guest ,
wherein at first was dight
thou thinkest that to me thy thought doth pass
wittingly thy feet have wandered
contain'd not ; and , as mightiest streams are wo nt ,
and in silence all the warriors
then , wandering into night , expire
on th ' other side _ satan _ allarm'd
the queen , an nearer view , the guest survey'd ,
to all the bráhmans wise and good
dark , as the darkness of the grave ;
even he , that tyrant arab , sleeps
and all the brave rhymes of an elder day ,
will royal bharat speak ,
of the sun .
er the whole blame neighborhood,--
and under great festoons of maiden - hair
glorified in its for - ever
drum now to drum did groan ,
drew them together again , remerging all
champion 's slayer and enable her to avenge his death .
that all the wandering world would gain .
with pious care , great ajax joins the band :
the wrong i did the earth . yet is eternity
that gullies the dense hill up to its peak ,
so give me thy hands and speak me
upon the gentle minstrel bard ,
and bacchus he ups and he steps aboard : " hi , stop ! " cries hook ,
the son of gautama , was told
if the dews on the leaf
no power can the impenitent absolve ;
like those trim skiffs , unknown of yore ,
reflect!--'tis the peace of existence you stake
ah , sweet angels , let him dream !
though to plant it the saviour of men
the joyous swain
twenty eyes glared wildly at him ,
and fate , those robbers fit for any crime ,
on what far quest of love forlorn ?
is always stretching hands to death its twin .
and where 's the blanket ?
mary , heed a mother 's tears !
be strong - backed , brown - handed , upright as your pines ,
the slender youth appears .
though good things answer many good intents ,
what hurts it us here that sorrows are born and die ?
clear which initial letters are capitalized .
who hated freedom on the sea or earth ,
so they marched and chanted , mingling tears and tributes ,
have you not lately changed your ship ? '
was ever darkness like to this ?
the merit of true passion ,
in exchange for a durkopp racer ,
and the flowing tide comes flooding in and chants around the quay
vain is the world ; but only to the vain .
what is a beautiful face ?
otium colleis amat , & sequestri
an ' the wee pouts begun to cry ,
i , the joy of life unquestioned -- i , the greek --
and the censers swing and click .
frank resided at home . he had chosen to pursue the business of
doves , ' twould say , ye bill too long .
upon the landscape high and low
and marble loveliness of some dead girl ;
to follow the useful plough !
in the dull glow incarnadine ,
even so to die is gain ,
in the days of childhood ,
his _ dang'rous _ virtues are discarded straight ,
and they laughed at hiawatha ,
by nature 's self in white arrayed ,
“ their love was equal : together they wandered upon the mountains ;
" comrade and equal of man , "
dear old barefoot chum , and we
glories in his heart humane--
the dart of vengeance , swift to kill :
are not my only paradise.[g ]
adverse , in caves æolian , and unbarr'd
just as composers please the ear
again she 's willing to be blest
is its poison , o my queen !
with masterly and brilliant play .
if when his bit of toil is through
vibrated through the discords of dull time ,
full sore did now repent .
i saw two seated leaning on each other , as pan is leaned against
his successive volumes are :   " children of the night " , 1897 ;
farther i see a robust fair ,
sits lowest , yet his gaze directs aloft ,
" that which dies not and that which can die are naught but the
how deep the paleness was , how motionless
the selfsame pace she hath begun--
rupert gave her a glance most bewitchingly tender ,
thou say'st that silvius ' father , ere he died ,
in garlanded procession with the swell
full of the living faith ,
which flap like rustling wings and seek escape ,
and if it 's true you say--
ah , when at last we lie with tranced breath ,
i have fled from her presence , and ever have tried
slaughtered in the desert lonely ,
then sang we a song for our chieftain
ere that fate makes an attack upon thy head
what households , though not alien , yet not mine ,
in strength lift up your hand , "
but did not come back .
are they the giants ' shadows moving ?
for hit was þe forme - foster þat þe folde bred ,
loth to dissever ;
leaving a kindled way .
the best of my beams are for ever dwelling
her faithful virgin throng ,
baby must have relaxation ,
therefore if that which i have said were true ,
that feels relief by bidding sorrow flow ,
of yonge wommen forto liere .
in awful majesty of perfect tone ;
have read the story of our love .
it split in fragments at the shock .
enjoys a land , where no diseases reign ,
a mile an ' a bittock , a mile or twa ,
there was also in our kingly indian reformer , one disagreeable
but not your praise , the which shall never die
thus , freedom , on the bitter blast
the lord of out - of - doors .
" thou thalaba hast chosen ill thy part ,
on the way i met a maiden ,
' twas silence in thy temple , lord ,
thronging to war in splendour and success ;
alas , my foolish heart ! alas , my sin !
irrevocably said ;
and dreaming through the twilight
would have thee weep with me in brotherhood ;
they are raising it , now !
" o , swift on the seas all day and night
would that he might return !
she is the darling of my heart ,
but not a love like mine , my katy !
you are not proud : you know your birth :
so in this life of ours the seats diverse
sing as they go ?
roused to revenge , the lord of men
" behold these mountain tops of various size
but a fleece to shield him from the cold :
in the face of some bleak norwegian wild ;
while london town , and all its suburbs round
kiss me , then ,
the sun had measur'd unobserv'd of me ,
ammon 's great son one shoulder had too high ,
her shamed cheeks were , and wild her fixed eye ,
dear tom , i do not like your look ,
or friend or foe , or thine or mine--
oh ! i will not tell you nay ,
to kindle or restrain .
he mounted straight on the swagman 's back .
from the couch of the unworthy ,
then , growling anew ,
peacefully slept hiawatha ,
on lancelot , where he stood beside the king .
that shrunk thy streams ; return , sicilian muse ,
to him who realm and life restored ?
and a - begging we will go ,
fierce fight that raged between the trojans and achaeans .
and when these trifling things are past ,
what , troilus ! wol ye do thus , for shame ? '
the stragglers in .
tell me a better fortune for my money ;
grating its low flight before ,
and all their echoes , mourn .
and for a crest a horse 's head surmounting
from troy or other shores , such as beset
pulpits and sundays , sorrow dogging sin ,
apollo playing ! and the hidden cells
will be carried away captives to the ships , and i among them ;
o ! lest the world should task you to recite
and preide him faire that he wolde
to glide among the pyramids--
out of the deep , into the dark ,
there 's organs three ,
if but from curiosity ,
adjoin each other , as i trust , some day
although i gaze upon no waste of snow ,
later in the gloom ,
the little moss is blossoming still .
and woke a deep desire to bear her part
or waited for them , fainting and way - worn ,
and placed him at his mother 's side ;
no merely slumberous phantasm , could unlace
and freedom 's banner streaming o'er us ?
the heights by great men reached and kept
to be milked by dwarfish women ,
his body , dwindled and awry ,
and , almost as it was when ships were rare ,
pray heaven that early love and truth
god alone , omniscient ukko ,
behold her how she smiles to - day
" the fresh morn waked me ;
then straightway rose these picnickers
that she , dear she , might take some pleasure of my pain,--
i love to lie beneath thy waving screen ,
whose dazzling radiance far around is thrown ;
who from lycaon 's blood his lineage drew . "
till the spirit fill thy bosom that inspired the meek lafarge .
or lowly hut , good friend , or loftiest dome ,
waiting the great event ,
that restless round about him
down - adown - derry ,
till now aeneas , fill'd with anxious dread ,
one may girdle the globe , i have heard them say ,
down to the pool ,
my passion with your beauty grew ,
whose guilty hand has slaughtered thee . ”
an ardor brief !    crimson on crimson grows
he was the loved of all , yet none
and sang it :   sweetly could she make and sing .
and how unstable are his chariot wheels .
and when it was time to go to bed ,
both gone before him to their fate .
no more shall i from henceforth hear a choir
ah , what whisper of doom ?
that spins the lark for shine , for showers ;
in the other little light serenely smiles
grow fairer for my sake ; the earth , the air ,
advantage rarely comes of it :
speak or act , oh ! coldly never ,
said the aged väinämöinen ,
do seeke most pretious things to make your gain ,
fish , and i 've galloped with four costermongers to the races ;
seven hours i swiftly sleep , while she
until his arching course was run
calling the lapsed soul ,
with abasement of the proud ,
green curtain door which no one entered by .
“ o lady , by thy lord ’s decree
neglected ; though one of the scenes , between vanoc the british
there where thy little flock " lie down at noon " ;
black thoughts be stilled beyond recall :
' he giveth his beloved sleep . '
impious i deem the alliance which he asks ,
the dazzling light , which streaming from thy wings ,
the only certain packet for the islands of the blest .
three in number , lofty mountains ,
to pohyola 's halls he hastened .
arden replied : " not doubtful were thy choice :
" nay , boy , look downward , " said his father ,
then choose thine own,--
the man in the wilderness
i would give something now to know ,
or were he not my dear friend , this desire
jeux d'esprit . collected and edited by henry s. leigh .
ye shall not suffer wreck ,
a god unto thyself ; nor less the same
petition for your pardon there .
if i had on my pink .
/ | c. 890 - 900                               |
then , as a horologe that calleth us
true , mighty sulla , cruel marius ,
is rent and blown away :
the sun of angels , him , who by his grace
the south breathes on -- oblivion of sublime
who in his right hand bears that falchion keen ,
thy majesty how bright ,
yellows and greens in the dark,--she walked again
the foes of learning and each gentle thought ;
there i 'll establish a city for me :
persuasion sleeping upon roses ;
and maid and mistress summoning
and how at last , into a fever sinking ,
the last sad duty of a daughter 's love !
love , come and sit upon my knee ,
y los torpes engaños en verdad !
and where are hearts so warm and true
fluttering first , then firmer ,
look'd down upon her festal lamps at night ,
" ah master ! ( said darby ) i very much fear
on every side constrained into one mass
as long as clings the root unto the sand ,
" otherwise indeed they threatened ,
with sadness , soon as he had caught the word .
my luve 's a flower in garden fair ,
the moon thy timid beams outshine
the bride and bridegroom,--and they go
his heart swell strong within him , his sinews
a counsellor for gods or men .
half of gold the lone years flee :
my very soul has suddenly been rife
unto the burning lake , for ever fed .
point forward phlegethon 's eternal flame ;
its glories all are given .
and staring face to face ,
trodden by priestly feet .   this i endure ,
suppliant i fall , imploring from thine art
against the season 's fruit for deadly seed ,
to its essential self in its own season ,
i bring thee draughts of milk , warm milk it is and new .
for io a time worne creuis in the wall ,
till you warn her hence , away ,
all higher knowledge in her presence falls
and their king it is who tolls:--
when hot society was easy fruit !
come name me the drivers of yesterday ,
_ and though at bottling of your wine _
and left the attempt to those who felt full bold
and tucked away in slumber soft and sweet .
but from a simple love of right;--
to train the lad , and rouse his sense ;
love , without which the tongue
into the sky it fairly got ;
light as the gossamer its tissue spins
getting ready for fourth of july .
( say the deepest gnomes of earth ) ,
then the aged vaeinaemoeinen
yet o'er that house there hung a solemn gloom ;
he , having this concluded in his thought ,
( neither by service nor fee
no matter whither !   under me , in shadow ,
though blest with wisdom , and with wit refin'd ,
pray you , lock on these my men and women ,
as falters through the quiet even ;
so that not an ear can hear you ,
where ancient neleus sate , a rustic throne ;
made at night a lodge of branches ,
young joshua ordered the sun to stand still ,
and while we count these heavy hours
the peaceful warriors of trade .
_ good news ! good news ! _ there is no way but this .
ye who the things of god , which ought to be
till death should call from his midnight sea .
the wind in the flame of birches in autumn ,
" what matters it ? love counteth not the cost . "
in the baby 's hand !
closing of a grave:--
for , washed in life ’s river ,
away from books , away from art , the day erased , the lesson done ,
" they say the dead are joyful
two youthful dames , not born in low estate ,
once led the senior class at yale ,
to fill her coornucopean .
himself , before he meed of praise refuse !
with the ban across the distant waters :
tiny are her feet and fingers ,
there we two , content , happy in being together , speaking little ,
o'erpower'd i fell : and what my state was then ,
in purfled kirtle and brocade
lo , now the battle won ,
then these words the hero uttered
third song , written during fever
did dancing sentence folks to hell ?
when , steadily steering landward ,
set to music by russ .
the little altar firmly stands ;
warn us away ; we must not here be seen
the genii of the stream :
' the nicht is neir gone ! '
fix'd deep within me , soon as this my lord
he wakes me in my grave so drear .
you will be with them again !
through the vast assembly ran .
one evening , with the winter - white
father of dryope . ]
and what i never knew ;
the ladies . how they had offended him , i know not ; but ,
enough ! thou art the acme of the earth--
with far hanging tongue and foam dripping jaws ;
of old through gates that closed on them
what i ’ve done , do ye to others ;
the magisterial sword in vain , and lays
of him and eke thy sister . / to friends was never sent
to apices ever shifting .
honour and worship be--
but say--_what _ shall the measure be ?
she cried , ' of such murders , how guiltless am i ! '
two nations , one in heart , shall make another troy . '
with such a gale from heaven vouchsafed , as sent
to aim , insidious , love 's bewitching glance ,
tempt the waters from their bed ;
thus made their mourning the men of geatland ,
the hardest steele , in tract of time doth teare :
seven lovely captives skill'd alike in arts
stand forward and modestly state his own merit .
{ * [ greek ] in strict grammar agrees with [ greek ] in 574 ,
her left hand down , aback her fair head lay
and never yet did tell - tale looks set free
why have i rear'd thee ! would that without tears ,
and th'heavens in glorie triumpht over all ;
no danger is near , you 've nothing to fear ,
to earn yourself a purer poet 's laurel
and hail us living whom as dead they mourn'd
across the unknown sea .
fore'er o'er all
and in that old oak 's leafy glee
before his eyes were waxen dim .
of subordinates ' success .
for wel i knowe be thi tale ,
little flowers were springing .
but soon as comes a warning word
this trout had lang been a dweller ,
ten thousand saw i at a glance ,
there must rest the good and evil . "
while the future slow advances ,
an ' nean i ' t ' village would have knawn ,
of neat old constantia , on _ my _ leaning back
whingin , whining .
where whiles the rich patrician blood is seen ,
are descendants of the lilacs
but ever let thy life 's best part be out of sight .
ambrosial provender ; and round their feet
he reckons up the several inconveniences which arise from a
and feel ourselves a thousand miles apart .
and in the time - to - be - bright years , grow wan ;
o'er swarded war - mounds grazed the cow ;
and the blue - winged duck will give you ,
at yonder fountain 's gelid flow ;
bids you go to your sleep and not trouble your head ;
our souls for latitude , whose strength in bound and term is .
of your own passionate serving kind who had brought
no pass through those , without a thousand wounds ,
wrote many a chapter to divert us ,
and his shoes squeak .
and while their host will credit give ,
ah , when the savage monsters came
than the men of sight .
if haply she may understand
then backward thro the darkened streets
nor less than a plump god to fill the bowl :
like the horns of an angry bull .
o night divine , o darkness ever blest ,
" let 's waken lord scroope right merrilie ! "
my pretty maids , ' tis thus with _ you _ ;
with conquerors these , and those with prisoners fraught .
past her light finger o'er the chords ,
keen regret and grief for the pain i gave him
the scorching heat of flame , when boughs do chafe
ye offspring of tethys who bore at her breast
throned , with the world 's most perilous sea for throne ,
and rule the country kingdoms , once our own ?
immense pour subvenir aux exigences de la disette , et les pauvres
four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this
and come , o iron rule of mind ,
it 's the stillness that fills me with peace .
south winds jostle them ,
_ martha . _ rather say , two more slaves .
daughter of the newer eve ?
round with the sun - illumined lantern held
and strange my child to me .
she lit the deck .   the heav'n - sent chance !
smilin ' tru ' de tears she greet me--
orestes , and retracing in his thought
crossed with warm lucent shadows on the brown
" please , mum , may i play with the cart ? "
her answer'd then the shaker of the shores .
and airy cradle , lowly bow'd his face
thou land of devotion , and health to the soul ,
then michael from a winter coppice cut
bot afterward it was forbore
as the wave to the shore , as the dew to the leaf ,
earth has no sorrow that heaven can not heal .
pours through the shallows his pelusian stream . ( 15 )
the tolerance and equity of light
the ladies look'd upon the comely knight
to all he ask'd , 'bout all he saw ,
his return . and how , in the meantime , odysseus discovers
so leave me , romney .   one who has seen a play
but bob , ungrateful cuss , he would never say ,
aptly , as it stands in the lucasta .
within my breast a secret voiceless flutter
the hillsides gleamed with golden maize .
he pillows back ;
when proud and lowly , loftiest and least ,
and conquered her scruples and gloom ;
but as the needles fly or spindles turn ,
eident , diligent .
can on thy chloris shine , love .
for he with bradamant , as with a foe ,
where so ready all nature its cookery yields ,
did he regret that tough _ noisette _ ,
in woes that were not made for him .
what radiant orbs that azure sky adorn ,
i send these songs -- and now i find
when workin ' an ' winnin ' seemed more'n enough--
who gave us nobler lives and nobler cares ,
when beauty boasted blushes , in despite
with following feet the heavenly stair
hùyan los àños con ràpido vuèlo ;
when the day waned and it darkened , i found that the flower had
glees resounding from male voices .
by fits , with secret smiles , a human heart
when yer he'rt 's sae far frae hame .
the prettiest things i heard them whisper ,
and a thousand tongues , the monster ,
in gems and garlands proudly decked ,
a true part of the landscape as sea , land , and air ;
he taunting said , " i that am slow to fight
an ' brings the blessed green !
try a postprandial pill .
here one being throng'd bears back , all boll'n and red ;
" ventrebleu ! then i swore a great oath ,
a fourth book of nonsense poems , songs , botany , music , etc .
to heights of crumbling power and futile fame !
and scrape the bones of bearded men .
come , lord ; though moon look more aghast at night
as beauteous boy , or beauteous girl might own .
by the busy wheel are spun .
for advantage of the nations .
of the infidels . but through a long sickness
sweetheart , i come .
the dismal horrors of the stygian shade ,
thou must rule them , or they rule thee .
some love their hobby till it flings them .
and promises of thought .
what thy short visit meant , or know
centuries to the emprise which made neptune wonder at the shadow
canto xxi . the rousing of khara .
he views new knowledge with suspicious eyes
this arm shall not refuse , though rome the prize . "
shaped them straightway to a frame - work ,
de cuantos concedió bellos presentes
" they engross all that favour once shown to her " .   first
gives me the tip there ai n't no joys like these :
me , began to say , " why dost thou still distrust ? dost thou not
with all the shrubs and trees it bore ,
no land can do vs harme , but wyth falsehod or stelth
we spread the canvas to the rising gales ,
the thumb and finger of authority
and hearts of men were sore beguiled ;
cheer'd onward by the love that lichts my nameless lassie 's e'e .
he wondreth what it myhte be ,
said ' here ! ' to the muster roll .
in the heart of love 's creating fire i stand ,
and i , with elbow on the window - sill ,
but toward the south a little now they bent ,
_ and some will see the day _
the wretch that wad a tyrant own ,
stop!--not to me , at this bitter departing ,
hallowest for toil the hours of indolence :
edinburgh , however , he wrote one number of " wilson 's tales of the
there will they seek thee . "   thus she spoke distraught ,
spread forth until the green is met ,
is not to make your choice too quick .
may , with her flowers and singing birds , had gone ,
from mouldy bread , and musty beer ,
over against the calling sea ;
circuses and mentone sand ,
we behold their tender buds expand ;
beautiful roses bloomed day by day ,
were fifties , hundreds , tens ;
watching all the mighty whalebones , lying buried by the breeze ,
her lips are like the muscadel ; her brows are black as ink ;
and the grim , grey highland engineer ,
a wilderness , like that we wander in ,
her blossoms thick as summer 's ?
accumulated during his minority by the indian government . his
you went ,
a galilean also by his looks .
so as the will fail not for want of power .
max and maurice ( naught could awe them ! )
to that which none will gain -- or none will know
" sister holly , " ivy quoth ,
sickness , humiliation , slow defeat ,
bot now i se þ{o}u art sette my solace to reue ;
its tower ascends , fog - wreathed and grim ;
tobias whole .   unlike what here thou seest ,
as thus they spoke , with wavering sweep
no : captain sword a sword was still ,
and of this truth experience leaves no doubt;--
coffins stood round , like open presses ,
a poet in his joy .
divorced from self , where late ' twas due ,
but , in the midst of mirth and wine ,
ne’re , through the midst of _ nereus _ broyles , had hee
its actions new .
e'er sin ' they laid that curst restriction
just for the present ; and in his lull'd head
with its mighty surge and swell
as the swans sailed into a sea of jet .
" oh , it 's not one half
gold were the gods , their radiant garments gold ,
milton describes the number of the fallen angels as
with each century departed
the sword , ne'er given for an end so dire .
and lentisks as staunch
then orange , mellowing richly into red .
a sword flashed out from one among them there ,
could'st thou then depart , forsaking -- thy devoted , constant wife ;
or idly roving , or intent on fate .
all treasure 's uncertain ,
i must not hold thee back .
to share the halcyon 's nest with thee :
our souls slip out and tremble and expand ,
new spirit replete with virtue , that what here
his letters not commended , _ ib . _
and what they 've brought to me !
  omitted in later editions .
venetians float ; and on th ' encircling sea ( 8)
the tongue is voiceless with bewilderment ,
that hideous band , in sudden overthrow ,
all lavender and roses and white kerchief ,
how the world woke anew !
and the way to look for a thing is plain ,
the tempter near a needle lays .
oh thou ! at length he cried , whom , next the gods ,
did not speak the truth , but took back the word that was on
“ of intercourse adulterous , own thou art.--
love lures life on .
o'er verdant fields , blue waters , everywhere ,
aye , set yer bonnet on yer heid ,
if i compose those fatal feuds again ;
it will come !
could call me back again .
than to antedate your day ;
truly cask , by losing mid - board or cross - piece , is not so split
tho ' to this i am really unable to swear ,
only give me permission to leave myself for one moment ,
" to me it looks the school - book that some stupid child
was such a bulse of gems as should amaze
lily pale ,
now to the navy borne on silent wings ,
and therefore now your name it blesses .
until one summer 's day
into the se so grene .
that had my garden for its goal ,
i was speeding , fast and well .
whose blindness , beauty doth immortal deem ,
are things what they seem
i doubt not that this day next fall
they themselves rather are occasion best--
a sigh that instant from his bosom broke ,
children love to tease , whereon any one who happens to be passing
  _ not so high , etc . _ : this limitation is very characteristic of
i 'll ring my bells .
he gan him thonken in his beste wyse ;
between two singular substantives , according to the schema
to such triumphant beauty , geoffrey , thralled ,
may shipwrights fail to launch you hence ,
thee ; arise and come ; let us find the opening through which thou
with open eyes , closed feet , and folded palm .
and with a suppliant voice implored his grace ;
thou seest thy noble king o'erthrown !
or he begyn , and nought wyll take in honde
and many ( if you so desire )
& ane neowe troye thar makian . ”
when they know i 'd _ good _ deal ruther
dreaming ,
holding a naked sword in his right hand .
slave - haters and slaveholders .
register _ in 1731 , deploring " the degeneracy of _ taste _ since mr .
the hungry queen - bird thence he beat .
the period might be less or more ,
improve on the scripture command ,
cclix . to mr . thomson . " logan water . " " o gin my love were yon red
little jesus , wast thou shy
the narrow place and thickly - swarming crew
that all base dreams thrust out at door ,
' i sat here thus when i was wedded wife ;
and cunningly the various wind
but go we ; night wanes fast , the morn is near :
till , at the ford of jordan , whither all
advice , and a generosity to aid with the most important kind of
vpon her head she ware a vaile of lawne ,
of duty that endures for aye :
of wild waves dashing on the shore .
against their bridal day , which is not long :
with knowledge;--man , poor , ignorant , and rude ;
itself ; for a wire of iron pierces and sews up the eyelids of
as they come forward , the genius of the wood appears ,
may i not do what i choose ?
whispered despair in the still isolation .
of waking flesh and sleeping grace ,
brood over all . for every shape that looms
was like the slender willow , when some storm
these , therefore , are his own peculiar charge ,
hath searched , and stung to grief
of water waits ;
like mighty babel , seemed too bold for man ;
he knows the mystery of the wood ,
even the dull cattle croon'd and gazed ,
all nature is but art , unknown to thee ;
so , bursts the cloud , o'erloaded with its freight ,
like fortune 's favors , tint as win .
a path with wedges cloven ; then fruitful slips
and when i shall fulfill my dream ,
he struck , whence , staggering like a ship , it reel'd ,
fairies and princesses ?
the landlord said : ' i say ,
maan - e'mo ( man - e'mo ) .    the mother of the earth .
but when he to the lady 's presence came
whoop up gee ' jus wash ma dances
their errands to each other , or the ways
an ' eke the lover he may see ,
and shudder'd at the blast , and trembled for the flower .
yet as in some necropolis you find
by an american writer .   this drama , " children of earth " ,
heard ' mid familiar flowers o'er the foam ,
both have your sunshine ; both , though small , are strong
where traffic blows ,
outstretched a large circumference of plain ,
wond'ring i gaz'd ; and admiration still
i am the letters of that fateful word
and faces individual ,
does n't somebody bump us , and bump us hard ,
but there is no joy in mudville -- mighty casey has " struck out . "
she ought to have inhabited
" if from this savage place thou wouldst escape ;
starting with tempest speed appear
a growing empire ; doubtless ! while we dream ,
“ unhonor'd by due rites , the bodies flame .
about the earth , an ' sea , an ' skies ,
his herbe , which is him betake ,
on plods the traveller till the day be spent ,
at weary noon i left the town ,
holy and strange ; and every glint
there 'll never be peace
was dashed upon the rocks of attica ,
quanti hoc constiterit cunque venire , veni .
supposing , then , that from necessity
and then , with a grace that was fearless and grand
who so loathes not too much the poore estate
each terror to dispel ,
` but i can not find where ye have found
or for desire to kiss , if it might be ,
the twilight deepened -- but love came not .
other chests awaiting threshing ,
while , ever and anon , he found a friend
a warrior 's god in glory 's clarion calls ;
now doth a delicate shadow fall ,
his orb along above the lands compels
i rode the great sea like a bird ,
with downbent glances , i set him in my lap !
with the peace of snakes and the pride of worms ,
state of passive perception to voluntary contemplation , were not
the flame seized upon all that it found green , in the rich
the gates of hell are open night and day ;
and made each flow its own .
while , swarming in those wilds , from tuft or steep ,
and the crown is ours to take--
well " ciren - cester"--one ought to say ,
" ' twixt the sky and billows"--i hear it again !
by this gray beard of mine , i swear , if one
gallop , gallop , gallop .
' tis very good and fortunate , if one be tired or ill ,
founders of thebes , and men of mighty name ;
as a self of purer clay ,
are quite a jolly spree ;
come back to st . andrews !   before you went away
_ ashley _ : " i should n't mind . but i 'm so sorry if -- and i will go . "
coolly plotted to undo me--
were playing dolls and houses ,
swifter through the snow
exercises at this academy , show a degree of knowledge , both
purple and grey the horizon walls them round
of whom are all things , even all comprised
to their huge wings , scattering combustion wide .
i am poisoned with the rage of song .
angry advance , quick tongues at poisonous play .
et eruditam quæ fugit gulam faba ,
restraint , though it did much their feelings , wound .
but he heard men speak and the hounds come up .
shame had not abashed thy eyes before me ,
all - mortal , and all - wretched!--'tis too much :
gods are thy suppliants , kama , and on thee
-- worldflower , if thou refuse me --
pity that such a name
at learning 's fountain it is sweet to drink ,
even love ( for love sometimes her muse exprest )
with debts i had to pay . ah ! everywhere
i shall not mind the bullets
and the world is a blank to him .
they find healing plants , and will tell where they grow ;
were yet disturb'd with airy quiverings ,
could find them out .   it was san gallo , then ,
like a dragon - fly , he hovered
so may no ruffian feeling in thy breast ,
he was walking , but still he walk'd on without heed .
with my bonnet -- so beautiful!--high up and poking ,
is quite true as i tell you that ulysses is come home again . he
with kind assurances that he would do
mons latus ionium cypri praeruptus obumbrat ,
without juice enough to get thoroughly mellow .
and found on the dove - gray edge of the sea
any region of the green earth .   widely she sought her heart 's
to feed and to blather--
to silken rows of gay and garter'd earls ,
to where the prospect terminates-_thee only ! _
learn to labor with thy kindred ;
that , sometimes , her mother would sing the things
around th ' unconscious sleeper 's tomb .
airplanes hover heavenward !
over the orchard , waste and brown ,
of laughter , and of memory , and of tears ,
who 'd said that they were friends of mine ;
of bold alcides many a deed beside
of that he mihte do now hier
a ' the joy wi ' him is gane
discourse ( or style ) , when one writes it laboriously and as a
over the dappled fallows wild away ,
avoy , avoy , alez avanz !
in the dark tarn of my spirit , love , the morning star is lit ;
i 'll give thee -- to the devil .
thy hospitality . but give me quick
" last night the height of my desire seemed won ,
the shores they sought
in prison drear ,
send forth prophetic sounds before they smite .
we 'll go in ourselves , sir ! "   and
while as the bagpipe tooted it ,
unsettled and changing ,
now the rite is duly done ,
storms through loud life 's tumultuous pleasures ,
but mingled languages were heard of men
the evening to the plains , where , shot from far ,
avenge thee of those arms , whose bold embrace
though king and lords looked , wondering , in a glance
and angad , his imperial heir ? ”
a thousand years ago , or more ,
john 's resolution now began to shake ;
in the mediterranean , off the coast of asia minor , was sacred to
_ faust _ . what 's that for ? a bouquet ?
just then an archer , from the right - hand view ,
till the lone woman said :
y en su gloria ) ,
and the night 's empty star - lit silentness ,
and oh ! but i love thee dearly ! "
where the snowy mountainous pass ,
their fearless heads they lean ,
and sin which brought me hither : -- i was fair ,
no public recognition of poetry
my gay little lover , don , don ! . . . don , don !
" nor strive our fortunes to relieve ?
if we cheerfully smile ,
ventured { your } lives ?
let men experienc’d speak , if they ’ll speak true .
except to the free !
in flying fragments shot the evening 's flame ,
content beneath the shade of allah 's hand .
for one cup of wine , and one bit of bread ,
( 3 )   " rudeger of bechelaren " , or , as the name reads in the
atrides through the ranks , and now arrived
the back parts of the deity .
that up - curled , blue , from long winchester pipes ,
and human feelings sad and passionate :
giver of bribes in the brightness of   morning ,
began to signalise the russ retreat ,
" the auld gudeman or young gudeman ,
and still , to my undoing ,
all my thoughts go onward with you !
would spend a social hour ;
there footed to his prancing notes
love mistress is of many minds ,
as old as earth 's first frenzied bier
but gives that hope to be thy bliss below .
of soul , truth , dignity , beauty , grace , purity and
" now twenty years , my man , " said i ,
is garnered up in prosperous memory ;
lo ! to the temple , with a numerous throng
when lo ! from op'ning clouds , a golden gleam
accustomed , an experiment of a new mode of writing , and succeeded
then in a hollow pearl , o'er moon - white waves ,
climb its frail rigging and go !
she bade bring bucklers forward heap'd high with ruddy gold ;
but not without the means to pay ,
with his eye he followed me ,
i to this lonely wood have hied
and now , o chief of hermits , hear
cyclops ! when thou devouredst in thy cave
till even the cloudy shadows
but that he first with his companion spoke .
love was between us both confessed .
the pride of man is our reproach .
if the baron had known how he would have glared
to wait in heavy harness ,
from his own giblet 's oils , an ararat
o would i had never given birth ,
lining the way to an old altar !
in january , 1868 , the next month after his marriage ,
to turn his eyes , he saw , all stiff and stark ,
these special gifts of honour gain :
joined in dreams an absent " mary , "
and een the dearest -- that i loved the best--
and some we ward from worm and thumb ,
so lions roar enclosed in train or trap ,
which god had given him as assurance of good faith,--
of old escaped from neptune 's car , full sure ,
courtyard , by day , and in the night they sleep each one by
the other lay a still and heavy mass ,
and , saying nothing , found a groping way
its every drop ' gainst the ills of mortality ;
my sire forsaken and my infant brother slain ,
to tempt his eye , and aid his towering thought ;
she , the smith 's wife , old and jeering ,
and saftly laid him doun ;
a milky whiteness spreads upon her cheeks ;
that he might contend with väinö .
scourges , and shackles strong ,
or in the se cast water , thynkynge it to augment
came back from very far .
the rothschild of the world below ;
wherefore dost thou leave thy castle ,
than hammer at this reverend gentlewoman .
oh , fear that life shall never more be whole ,
there are the beehives ranged in the sun ;
a presence which is not to be put by ;
his brother 's fall , and guarding , spear in hand ,
" i accept thy challenge , thor ! "
" there are young foxes in that tree back there ,
' t will do us proud to put him out .
the king unto his sone tolde
how from his locks they smoked and mantle wide ,
let them fall on the pure in heart like dews ,
poor maiden ! bootless wail or vow--
francois and margot and thee and me ,
annexed their millions , and alas , have flown !
curving like inky frozen comets ,
the earth recedes from me into the night ,
( " it always goes on , " said a friend ,
the june is here this morning , and the sun is shining hot .
to bankrupt soul , and greeted them as peers .
with silent lips .   " give me your tired , your poor ,
come , but as the human maid !
por espacios incógnitos perdido ?
i ask if love , whose sun hath set for thee ,
for heaven 's gates to open well waits he
then looked down into the furnace ,
.        .        .        .        .
but thinking it not otherwise than meet
on the dusty road : a carriage stopped :
but the time wears ; and we would see thee dance .
thy cross and passion , even unto death !
a good deal practised here upon occasion . '
aeuro ~ ye , be trouthe , aeuro(tm ) seyd torrent than~ ,
censure on thee , lorenzo ! i suspend ,
and heaven - ward rose from many a voice
for there the whole earth -- like a single being -- fills
to ocean , and the billows lightly skimm'd
to mamma i can carry big boquets .
“ scarce may the living find their way
and put her arms around him , burned away
no -- not alone , the musing wanderer strays ;
he wore the cleric 's broadcloth and he hooked his vest behind ,
gozar quiero del bien que debo al cielo ,
" ' o kings , o folk of the dwarfs , why then will ye covet and rue ?
of things that do not concern us !
at intervals , wild accents of despair ,
if aught of young remembrance then remain ,
to haunt , to startle , and waylay .
his majesty has not yet appeared .
scene i. a peak of the alps . werner alone . time , morning .
the blood new spilt while thus they slaughter made ,
those , who had not yet witness'd what wonders wrought his hand ,
then arose old wainamoinen ,
canto lxxviii . manthará punished .
o then , how bright ,
the shaft , with cureless venom in its sting ,
well pleased with colour'd vellum , leaves of gold ,
melted away in that magic spring .
the author of his cursed race .
fill a glass to the heroes whose swords kept us free ,
" you mean?--oh , for some miss .
the light coquettes in sylphs aloft repair ,
in conflicts distressing ,
cross these pompous portals .
till he had made himself thy son :
spreading her silken blushes - does she know
now before they silence ruth ,
with morning on the grass .
across the plain ; and seemed to be among them
" fly , my lord bishop , fly ! " quoth he ,
and a face turned from heaven ?
standing , like acolytes of stone ,
helen is too , too dear
a harmony that , finding vent ,
brings hate on that which he so loved before ;
go -- but the circle of eternal change ,
are all asleep to - night .
no other sounds were dear
standing on the steps of a marble temple .
what they foretel , is deemed the voice of heaven .
and my father will sing the seed - song
and in your blissful errand reach the spot .
fata donauere bonique diui
and gave me back my power and fame .
she to her mournful sister thus address'd
twisting and rumbling and feeling fine .
whirling the stairdust , hazarding oblique ,
behold the master that can tame thee down
with plashy pour , that scarce was sound ,
the crocus cups hold flame
delight in all that pleased before--
great tan - brown hares in gusty march
prithee , why so pale ?
sweet health is banish'd and she finds too late ,
becomes its quickening pulse and principle and soul .
and their guerdon is -- the rod ,
and , in believing , kindled to such fire
and then they shall hear strangely .   many with eyes
' quae tantum ' dicat ' potuistis ferre poetam ,
by this path war advances . "   thus they moan
within my loving creed .
what would i not have given then to tell !
where all the brethren are so hard , to warm
but nature protests ' tis all quite otherwise ;
and answer , ' let one living head ,
and the rope of the black election ,
the dog is not of mountain breed ;
the cruel tiger , and the cat ,
encounter'd swords and double - pointed spears .
offerings,--golden wax , and snowy incense .
put out their tongues , for noon .
still gazing on that face for charms renowned . "
worse than the tumult -- all eyes staining down
the alps neglect their curtains ,
it look'd around , as eager to explore
thought cunning darius : " now i sha n't go
daughter , a brother , or a friend .   as the process of these
a grace before dinner
this after - sunset is a sight for seeing ,
lend , lend a hand ! lend , lend a hand !
where art thou ?
to begin with we closed the _ bucentaure _ alone ,
to that small flame , whose very name
the palm , and laurel , round his temples bound ,
both law and impulse : and with me
once a sort of devil came
perhaps it may be lined with this my canto .
the thunder 's voice , the groaning air ,
and perfects them in one ,
for if the pole 's not open , but all frost
our fervid heart has filled that book in chief ;
stood suddenly . a laugh of wild delight
the chest taking hue from the gash in the limb ,
nothin' funny anyway ;
our author was more happy ; he was honoured very young with his
and for the work of that
a " pastoral letter , " grave and dull ;
bewilder'd with the monstrous agony
and shake the great globe with the strength of their hands ,
fon neuer in forty dayeȝ , & þen þe flod ryses
a few friends leaped with him , standing near .
but he who through this common air
that florence gave the renaissance to rome .
by me shall thy enemies , / --that know thou-- full requited be . "
to drugs , say i--
in triumph rode , the victors of the main ;
the sea surges up with laughter and pale gleams the smile of the
the bird of god , who at the portal sits ?
the boozer thinks he is splitting the wood ,
had closed his miseries with a _ coup de grace _ .
my brother and master was ; and he albertus
and here myself .   under my head are dragg'd
have all been called my _ first _ .
" and fetch me my harness , and saddle my horse ,
what joy a secret glade would give to me !
anger had led her to take cruel vengeance on tereus .
i sunk on the red of that robe ,
till then the spirit finds no resting - place ,
fairies tripping merrily
say it is true!--
the wisdom of our foreheads , the cunning of our knees .
faithless suitor of the northland . "
already caponsacco had descended
the sweet song died , and a vague unrest
ever , i deem , good guido would have been
traditions of the saint and sage ,
that led my pliant heart astray ,
dance , and provençal song , and sunburnt mirth !
gaze on the embers of the sunken sun ,
and ask why it 's delayed .
linquor et ancillis excipienda cado .
see genii of the past arise .
encamp thir legions , or with obscure wing
the core of vital gladness
" meanwhile circe had been seeing that the men who had been left
back to killarney at sun or at shower - time ,
by allah ! i will promise anything !
before again the sun shall glow . ”
like gunther he demean'd him , false mimic of the true ;
who sighingly adore .
they scorned , but the heart of the haughty is cold ;
sped on the work , and charged them to bring thence
holy angels guard thy bed !
swoops again on lightning - pinions ,
i from spray to spray did rove ,
" rouse then , thy courage , let thy faith be strong ,
the black was all there was by day - light ,
and thunders in my startled ear
answered in the words which follow :
the city 's voice itself is soft like solitude 's .
in passionate prayer he spake:--lo , with shrill scream
they gave me reverence for all who pace
touchende a point hem hath opposed .
the king ayein began to crave ,
sette notti appenàstevi . egli nel nuoto ti superò ,
their ends to keep up if they can ;
by yon castle wa ' at the close of the day ,
wrennok shot a full good shot ,
and after his own image made .
the images of things bestowed
only she ca n't get at it .
his style
" follow me , " he said ;
and still be savage , for truth 's sake .
and confusion of the battle ,
invisible else above all starrs , the wheele
no ears have ever heard ,
to loughrigg - tarn , etc .
when she lit her glimmering tapers
and breeding impulse and propensity ,
pure gold admits the finest filigree .
scare the horses from the mangers ,
interea prope jam occidente sole inhorrescit mare ,
so all is turned into wildernesse ,
no window - bars shut out the stars ,
and set him up a deity ;
dry flame , she listening ; after sank and sank
gain the man 's joy , miss the artist 's sorrow .
the tawny moon begins to rise
and no men came in at midnight ,
leave to the foeman no spoil at all .
its erring fury hiss’d along the skies ;
steel clashed on steel !   together warred
orsilochus , swift of foot , who in wide crete was the
thus was this yonge lord him one ,
admitted mediocrity in poets . "
who the maiden thus dishonored ,
never shall wither away .
and the panes began to quake ,
through dawns of tenderness i see,--
giving as much of ardour as it finds .
early german poems on the story of the nibelungs , although it is
the transient . be thy pride
and we 'll tell you in this letter
the king 's lone road , his visit , his return ,
he may answere , and seye this or that ;
they shall encounter , conquer , and subdue . "
in court , at aix , to gallows - tree condemned ;
this little lane that leads to woodlands fair,--
' o spare , thou noble baron , spare
( ' twould seem ) to be to argier 's realm addrest .
her stormy rage was soften'd ; she was no more the same ;
that man , created in god 's image , placed
and drove down the shining shell roadway which wound
the eternal silences were broken ;
shall answer for yours in hell .
--centre of a sphere of odour--
i have a vision , coroner ,
your some one with an iron flail
a jocund farewell to our glimmering home .
the tired flocks come in
to my great happiness , madam .
such chance to lose gives pain .
merry the meeting was of ancient comrades and neighbors :
the birds sang love on every spray ;
thy timely mandate , i deferred
i mean , has passion never stirred your breast ?
bundle , to drop the -- to surrender ; to give up hope .
o sinless babe ! by god are given
strode across the hills and broke them
a strange security , a peace serene ,
for morning 's clouds now rolled away from earth .
stretch out your hand to me , douglas , douglas ,
and in the dense entangled forest shade
and like palmyra famous in the east ,
in the dear master 's name , and for the love
that he whom i was following had spoken ,
some melpomene woo ,
as if intent on heaven those eyes
as little jenny wren
nor jove 's son , when the charms of iole
the letter'd fop , now takes a larger scope ,
printed by t. and a. constable , ( late ) printers to her majesty
and evere i am aliche nerr .
such is the world 's great harmony , that springs
as thro ' fragmentary fleece
through six bull - hides the furious weapon drove ,
far off a song from the blading grain ;
she sung , as she danced me about on her knee ,
and festal rings , with which olympic maids
is it because they are allowed to go out in bad weather ?
she saw how pleasant it may be
we ran ; my feet were all bleeding ,
gave light enough to hint their farther way ,
wrought in my bosom , i the scatter'd leaves
o but it is not the years -- it is i , it is you ,
croaks the big bullfrog of reelfoot lake
neither press forward myself nor bid you do so , but death in ten
to the waters of tuoni ! "
nor dare appear before king norandine .
vain was the chief 's , the sage 's pride !
of the mute races of trees . while hoarsely the steam from her
old meadows , green with grass and trees
tenderly a woman view ,
in the cold tomb , heedless of tears or rain .
to raise his fame and place him with the gods ;
a clear and ancient harmony
listening to their speech which gave me understanding in poesy .
the eldest said--'young ranko 's ring
" the blacksmith and his apron , "
yet served one instant to restore
" --we'll go , " i sing ; but who shall say
come i , with wistful glance ,
their death she saw , and mad with pain ,
the bells of paris chime to me ;
anger me , and old though i be i defile thy breast and lips
to ever find worse worlds than they 've made this ;
and with them taught the children of the poor
and nága lord , and snake , and fiend ,
a traitor 's fate may them await ,
feigning fears of indigestions
whether the darkened room to muse invite ,
lucasta , that bright northerne star .
under his slouched hat left and right
" you have the pyrrhic dance as yet ,
a thousand ghastly legions came
now at the last achilles ' strong son marked
particular to himself ; and here he would have ended that work , if
by his choristers attended ,
seeking along the meadow ooze ,
from gunga 's banks , or mounts of malabar
pure face to his that , smiling , bent
others people 's darlings gaze ,
fled to night a thousand mays ;
which struk a lustre through her outward skin ;
that called the sun from darkness , decked that flower ,
mrs . wiggle , the three misses wiggle , and little master wiggle ,
not till her last tower crumbles ,
responsive to the cuckoo 's note ,
stands full within my view , to which this hour
the bridges thou dost lay where men desire
as from a fountain'd unison of soul
and will be till i die !
unconquer'd in the fight , the cæstus shower'd ;
heigh ho , fair rosaline ;
how can i the thought forego--
that ' tis thine angel , who , with loving haste ,
ryemeadows brook was there ; the roughs , the oak
would sit , and hearken even to ecstasy ,
their fixed limitations which do bound
kindness .
ye , being mockers , said : what profiteth him his singing ?
dawn 's ghost that filtered down a shafted stair
the limpid water turbidly ran ,
the bedroom clock there shows ' tis after eight !
rambling i looked for an old abode
fast and furious he rode through the thickets which rose
and bends the wreath round george 's royal brow .
fair santa cruz , arising , laves her waist ,
they have no pathway where they go ,
always the world has had its poverty .
and glad , with all your soul , to find
less heavy will seem my load ;
had not his appetite , which never fail'd him ,
" if i to his throne soar upward ,
there were thrown two helpless ones ,
such love she bore her children / she bade rich dress prepare ,
but those are fiends , who crimes from thought begin ,
i thought how far above me merlin was ,
and dappled darlings of the kine--
and when still evening gave him up to rest ,
who would think , now , a throat
and where 's the queen who willed to slay
pellervoinen , earth - begotten ,
that in its homeless wanderings sobs in an undertone
been set on anything within this land . "
' tis like to a rushing cataract ,
has fallen in grief 's furnace and been suddenly burned ;
i 'll even sketch you as you are
comes up amid the water - flags . all night
bring the west - wind from the ocean ,
may set at noon and make perpetual night .
placing , from ancient testament and new ,
good my lord siegmund ? / this case thou dost not know .
i woll nomore specefie ,
and unto him that sat thereon was given
by the road that leadeth to ispahan .
of him , of me , of all ,
black clouds and stormy winds around her body fly .
of thilke ston with othre tuo ,
a being breathing thoughtful breath ,
and seith that he is mochel holde ,
i do n't stand still and look around
and thou shalt be right charitable
none that behold those strokes maintain their place ;
or haply make shadows and rhymes for themselves .
_ edinburgh literary journal _ she afterwards contributed numerous
while near her school the church - spire stands ;
seem'd fire , breath'd equally from both .   oh speech
gold - hall of men , he gladly discerned ,
and the rooms no flame illumined .
by him she nurs'd ; antiphates ' abode ;
leucothoe the divine !
an ' stuck as close ter ole marster 's heel
but now from the fields come father , come at the daughter 's call .
the choice of all my treasures take ,
he is blooded to the open and the sky ,
til that sche sawh the spume whyt ;
kepynge the dore whyle the auoutrer is within
fluenta solus integer
by the cities clad with gold and shame and famine ;
age is too weary for the butterflies--
london was a city when the poulters ruled the poultry !
all the lights and sounds of war , the fates and fears ;
of earnest men and worlds of work - a - day ,
and , from another , one reflected seem'd ,
and in mid palace trembles at the blow :
he works until ,
the threshold ; at his back he wore
that drove newton , drove columbus ) ,
un commis - voyageur , vous me le foutez belle !
no bird , but an invisible thing ,
brought the sunshine of his people ,
' you want a match , i 'll gladly play you
through diver passages , the world 's bright lamp
i think that i was mad , a furious passion
then followed her attendants / and with them thither brought
lads and lasses , there they met
among the thorns he planted , and all round
was charming in every sense of the word :
( wild is the fire and low is the wind )
--what befell
and some for both together ;
nor tremble , my lad , at the state of our granaries :
and , philomel , report my timerous fears ,
all the snakes on earth were harmless to that awful antidote .
with fire our ocean - going ships , and slay
cursed god 's good bells for the noise they made ,
_ with the man that shot sandy mcgee . ( in color ) _
broken by the wind ; calculating wings set above
his might is only then so indomitable when i myself enter the
hath freed my heart of all the griefs it had ,
meanwhile the boy , rejoicing in his strength ,
twelve saints had once stood sanctified in stone ;
full of rage , and full of grief .
rich , in succession , come , then fade away ,
say , as the finale of a madman 's deed ,
treasures to his home . '
of whiter , weaker flesh and bone more frail ;
those tongues to sound , that have on sweetest milk
when the spirits of love , their wings unfolding ,
roams the mount and haunted grove ;
" these to the printer , " i exclaimed .
do you!--mother of being in me , heart .
from one incognizable root
so , when my mistress shall be seen
and still saved up the profits that he made ,
he spake and parted .   wroth , but all in awe ,
'cause i see a woman kind ?
brings the blacksmith , ilmarinen ,
love , to your lips farewell now--
his comrade brave , who waited with his car
as memory and as joy to me
he could not carry off -- so he 's now carrion .
whereby he earneth him the daily bread ;
betwixt the quarters flows a golden sea ;
fill'd the wide extended plains around ,
beneath a putrid mount of bone ,
so many dear assurances , who hear
more nimble than along the other straits ,
that overfloods my room with sweets ,
he led him homeward , talking as he went
his first attack , wide - waving to and fro
by that mysterious force which lives within
countless boards , and ribs , and braces ,
the spirit that at hjörung broke
struggling burst .
ending and it was at once assumed that i had been disappointed in
wishing strange wishes;--among many ,
race - starter 's rhyme , a ,
for us must work together well .
symbol of the spirit ,
birds unto rest are falling , falling , falling ,
when they came they had found us dead
us to out - folly the excess
stood she among her nymphs , unbowed
three children o'er them bend ,
bracchia nexa tenens ultro te , somne , repellit ,
expect the coming of it every day .
one moment 's comfort in my matchless ill .
his bounds abrupt ; confin'd by sardis here ,
he onward advances , where boughs overshade
" i 'll brew a goodly sop for thee . "
for the joy of morn arising .
perfume this book of mine o blood - red roses !
runs the path i took ;
but even - paced come round the years ,
spurr'd and belted , so he rode , steel to draw and steel to goad ,
but mair dear is the blast the lane shepherd that chills
each day she rose contented ,
to their sister author , the nameless he ,
for thou art woo'd already by the prime
and looks just so .
serene , and resolute , and still ,
little we fear
craft 's kingdom now is past ;
and he get na hell for his haddin '
quo ' sir raif , " an ' though , mark ye ,
there with the women , haggard , painted and old ,
did in that castle afterwards abide ,
' what charms the historic muse adorn , from spoils ,
tiny heart beneath my hand ,
( as the wealthy do ) when he went from earth .
' omurs ' and stuff ' ( also pointed out by mr . lobban ) are
they 've choked ; they ca n't come back to life again .
then in him time shall run
was i , betwixt urbino and the height ,
poised on a bulrush tipsy with his weight ;
we 've gone beyond the funkin ' , 'cause we 've found it does n't pay ,
the top it hummeth a sweet , sweet song
the broken seal ,
who , spurning fortune and fame ,
as down we sat the flowers amang ,
oh , love like mine ne'er wants the zest
that stoop or run , that kneel to pick ,
and hers shall be the breathing balm ,
barnacle on his dead renown !
the women are a ' gane wud ,
there came a noise of revellers : the rills
oh , how blissful life would be !
more spacious making more our home ,
have no timid fear of wounding ;
príncipes , grandes señores ,
still the learned volumes lay ,
supply'd by springs that on the skies depend ,
then sped she to the youth—“a kiss —
was vague ' mid the poised spheres .
in the mystery
becomes the mark of every eye ,
and christabel devoutly cried
to which the elders might with propriety pledge themselves . ]
perchance-- " " oh ! speed the hazard of those hours , "
no ! with the _ curs'd _ your tomb shall foremost stand ,
while the tiger trees roared of the glories of old ,
lose not thy life in barren quest .
therefore the present piece of natural history
" relief ! " " advance , relief , all 's well ! "
as far as i know , that the church receives :
neighbourhood presents only widely - extended plains , turf - bogs and
the winter season broke before the spring .
i ' ve wander'd , puir fule ! for a face fause as bonnie :
i sought him on the purple seas ,
a lost good name is ne'er retriev'd . '
without the expense and the suspense of bedding .
jove smiled to see the man caressing
but still came the leaf words , little brown elf words
the horrid ruine of the new - borne age ,
whose crack gives crushing unto all .
of kinde with non other beste .
and there he paused , and sighed ; then thus he told :
what if your toys had been tainted with crime ?
neither shies he nor is restive ,
are seen descending showers .
what part of earth their wreck would strew ,
she need not mind who has the rest .
which all the woe of the universe insacks .
will find the present volume and listless turn the page .
' t is but a step down yonder lane ,
when the last message came from maurice somerville
who hopes thee , monarch , for his future guest .
while the sky burns blue above :
nor thinking such a cruel shock to meet ,
at the star - lit evening time ,
when the good minstrel folker to counsel this began ,
a being with life and its best feelings warm ;
to wrap around my head ! "
must have swallowed the bait ;
his sandals fair to his unsullied feet ,
as molly sadly breathed a sigh
regions they passed , the mighty regencies
" let us dismiss , as irrelevant to the poem _ per se _ , the
so , in his time , thy child grown gray
of vnprofytable stody .
and so it hapnyth that in the worlde be
what glories from my diadem flow :
in the forest , in the castle ,
for there is earth upon my eyes
the famous lineage , for so many years
the raging vengeance of the moors defies ,
dusk off the foreland -- the last light going
and shall we scoff at europe 's kings ,
a slim sword , silver - hiked , flecked with rust :
to kindliness -- to kindliness ! " . . .
their fickle wreaths about thee flinging ;
than he , that with cleane minde and heart sincere ,
bodies , and thus recruit them as they stream ,
for be sure the bravest wing
and you 'll be touchin ' him with your elbow ,
are put away , and no more tears
is common sense quite banish'd from thy breast ?
that wastes and scatters ere the wave has roared--
then from the shore the captains gazed
said a dear voice at early light ;
heroes whose deeds on gama 's crest shall shine ;
from the side of some hoar hill ,
the smoke now west , now south .
perplexi crines , frons improba , tempora pressa ,
his ordering fingers point the dial 's to time their ranks :
ballad of " johnny armstrong , "
to some far shore
to us , as likely tasting to attaine
and edge with meeting wings the yawning ground ,
the bolt from every prison door !
perchance the crude and common tongue
they came at bessie 's call .
and where the hair is floating wide
ill - concealed desire for revenge is noticed by the frisians , who
" never true poet lived and sung in vain !
and in the bushes how is lost
war - spirit ! war - spirit ! thy secrets are known ;
the highest of the trinal stairs , whereon
and also colton 's ' lacon , '
a cloud upon a sunlit land ;
fill the rich ears that shade the mould
roun ' de corner playin ' craps ?
went down across the meadows
by fiery tempests , sudden disappear .
" serve her right for her meddlesome way ! "
they came to conquer or to fall ,
god and the people should be one ;
" spikenard and myrrh to thee i bring ,
sir torrent dwellid thare
holding up high the fair water flower
like one half mad , or drunk with too much wine ,
in days that shocked john evelyn ,
as where rhone stagnates on the plains of arles ,
beyond the russian batteries a few toises ,
protected her from view .
underneath the whole world 's blot ,
she could hitch into a rhyme ,
the _ cornhill _ priest , who never cou'd deceive )
us old - timers , we all said we was better we was dead ,
that he boldly swung ;
where the blue tides come and go .
before you sling your ' ook , at the ' ousetops take a look ,
oh ! what would my lord his - high - nose say
the king 's cold look , the nobles ' scorn ,
but , though a veil of shadow hangs between
and vine groves garlanding the rhone,--
who with the spear and with the nails was won ,
a shield by human vision undescried
and thrice they knocked ere he moved his chair ,
and the father has to pay .
thy yonge children of theyr synne and abuse
but soft low notes , borne on the gale ,
hallowed to dis , and charge thee now from out thy body fare . "
to make a lily tremble !
then most conspicuous , when great things of small ,
we wore , in social ease , the hours away ,
the mink was more at home on water ,
their horses ' feet sucked at the mud ;
i am sick o ' wastin ' leather on these gritty pavin'-stones ,
god means every man to be happy , be sure .
sleeps in the fine black grains , and there
neither wights nor whisks i care for ,
' i 'll warrant she 'd fancy a ghost by her side ,
and your inmost soul be still ,
to this infernal lake the fury flies ;
whereby our very wishes are made one ;
awake ! awake !
to scour more distant regions .   he himself
of generous deity ?
" for _ him_!--that storms may take not unawares ! "
it is no dreame , nor passion of the minde ,
there all men may be cured , whene'er they please ,
the highland welcome ,
asserts " there 's no police like holmes ! "
into the mist my guardian prows put forth ,
up there in the starry heavens
star - bud and flower
the mother 's recompense 2 v.
but when i saw your eyes i knew
but such abuse has from your coarse pen fell
for death , despairing of relief .
o father jove , ' tis said that thou excell'st ,
i , whose heart had possessed him
’ tis a beautiful country to practise economy .
the third daughter of tuoni combines the malevolent and repugnant
oft on autumnal eves , when without in the gathering darkness
there 's erin 's high ormond , and scotland 's montrose !
the stars swam high ,
blends , in exception to all general rules ,
and it was n't on a liner on the easy german plan ,
to swell a progress , start a scene or two ,
recover'd ; and , well nigh astounded , ask'd
for on the turbid current of his passion
in toilsome chase they won , composed their scanty fare .
and wherefore this exordium?--why , just now ,
down in manala 's abysses .
while , what my great experience teaches
d'ye think he 'd listen ?   oh , not at all :
that vashti doth not heed thy will
some scale a tree that they fear to name ,
al valor .
deaf to the joy to meet -- the woe to part ;
talk , and laugh , and dance , and sing ;
busy in attendance about his person , for he had but just done
mother , let me fly away .
bosom with golden clasps , and she girded herself with a girdle
drew his net along the waters ,
of ' this one knoweth ' and ' that one saith',--
climbing its nine miles nearer to the stars .
i heard you solemn - sweet pipes of the organ as last sunday morn i
" so , if it thus content thee , dear love and lady mine ,
yet he performs this tedious task
in this neglected , ruin'd edifice ,
you made the present of a black gauze hat .
above the town the heliograph hung like an eye of flame :
with a laugh to answer the wind at play .
the tawny asian climb his giant knees ,
an ' winter fu ' o ' snaw an ' sleet ,
i am , thou art , and the strong - speaking jesus ,
and in my parlor build a fire .
" whose banners thou wert born ; his discipline
over cliffs , through surf is strolling ,
glad , angry -- but indifferent , no !
a certain treatise , oft , at evening , read ,
the household hearts that were his own,--
an honourable hymne i eke should frame ,
aurave distinctos educit verna colores .
hedn't no particular objections to that ,
and he 's ridden off to london town
beautifully translated by longfellow , contain some
or headpiece of the kindly calf .
tell me , o beloved husband ,
and from here on and up to his throne
¿ de qué beldad se paga
the cheek to thine i fondly lay ,
will you believe this tale of snakes ,
all nightingales but one in all the world
but night shall come atoning
directed , and thou plainly shalt behold
let your exalted fancy , tho ' ' tis new ,
then came a few brief lines , by vivian penned :
the high hill birches shine like purple plumes ,
that he seems born to run ; he bears away
" and i will show thee the realms of space
her grateful heart the saving hand repay .
" laugh’st thou not , jove ! from thy superior throne ,
by cherith 's side we seek in vain ,
the first act shows the simple country maid ,
many wise things saying ;
and the woodlands smell so sweetly in the morning .
and wish those wreaths of glory mine ,
whose folly laughs to scorn
who partake of dates , periwinkles ,
a low black boat that hugg'd the shores ,
did you only mean to say ,
upon the seas pushed downward -- gradually ,
and ofttimes misty clouds of incense sweet
as i , o my love , love thee ;
that i no sompnolence have used .
i would gather all its sweetest roses ,
or some dim outlet in the darkling way
yielding i would have them ; yet
yet ( what is wonderful ! ) they found
assist him .   so to me will comfort spring .
and began " sacrificing to the graces , "
fear of death
amazement waited me ; for in her eyes
but for some cause not wholly out of ken ,
roses of love , time killed you one by one ,
with odours , and as profligate as sweet ,
in the most secret council , with his lords
the soaring lark , the perching red - breast shrill ,
and loiter at my ease ,
namque suos odit damnans radios nocensque lumen .
in cheeks graved hollow now by care
" whether my love loves me , or no ,
you must not claim your bride .
but say not to the trusting maid ,
lawes did not set to music amarantha , a pastoral , nor any portion
an ' he ai n't by ' isself in dat .
up sprang the chief;--and on a throne of cloud ,
i finde upon surquiderie ,
swift to be hurl'd--
by gallows knaves ?
for you will come ,
heaved with the tumult which the lip represt .
and lie beneath the sod ,
e phantasies
none answer'd this , but after silence spake .
one gush of light these eyes will brim ,
" ancient minstrel , wainamoinen ,
from thee the honour to my friendship due :
i wonder which is best : a rich plum - pudding stuffed with plums ,
our sails we spread at dead of night ,
and light intuitive . no shedders they of blood ,
turns she now afresh to scan
avant vous j'étais belle et toujours parfumée ,
the serpent suttlest beast of all the field .
and ill they kept , hath of the beauteous world
" how many ? seven in all , " she said ,
" we 're making twenty knots , " i said ; and felt
was even to play life 's game with loaded dice ,
the good and ill alike displayed , that lie
( ll . 2914 - 2922 ) " slay not thy son , dear abraham , but take the lad
turned from its usual pallor to bright red !
so it 's knock out your pipes an ' follow me !
sees the blade with golden handle ;
and give me all to keep ;
and butt of malm : !
years that have crowned you with the priceless crown
we ask no more of fortune 's store
and thy voice , as thou goest down
for his stalwart arm to the oar is bent ,
whose name thou speak'st not him i fain would view .
and the silver cliffs of wales ,
that it may live for ages long !
that thorny path , those stormy skies ,
let in thy voice a whisper often come ,
it crossed the sea and reached the shore ,
to stan ' or rin ,
the streams and the crimson and white flowers and reach
and that dark taste still lingers in the mouth
the glory of their hopelessness :
but live on odors soft and sweet .
or a language to my mind ,
and , through breached batteries , side by side ,
that you 've grone so long , and thick , and phat ;
without the cost of some repentant tear . "
toiling through mists , drenched by the arrowy rain ,
thine all her cities , all her subjects are . "
bid thine beware , lest here the sanguine scene
as far as eye could see .
created ; but henceforth my early care ,
and when she was good ,
at awful distance long they silent stand ,
no verdure hath , nor bloom , nor fruits that shine
have lighted up and led his age ,
or ere it dart unto its aim : but shine
and when o'er our pillow the tempest is driven ,
while , prompt to please , with mother 's art ,
from tranquil sleep , and to the roaring waste
the girth of it and the wharf of it and the wall ;
nor to allure the envious eye
“ why hast thou thus forsaken me ,
sink when it rains , and when it freezes swim .
with such daring wings !
they , the threshold hastened o'er ,
i am nothing but a dull eye myself ,
youth , with pale cheek and slender frame ,
and still she haunts those woodland ways ,
stiff were her frozen limbs , closed were her eyes .
with scream of shot , and burst of shell ,
and for the comely carriage of it ,
pulled his mouth awry in anger ,
they marched all in silence,--they looked on the ground .
avaunt -- i will not fight thee -- indeed i dare not .
but wit 's a native of the soil ,
remembered his brother 's saying that in their deceased father 's
if my son is home returning ,
thy loveliness breeds discontent ,
i ken the devils darena touch me .
lunam finiri cernis , ut incipiat .
and long , long winters have gone by since then .
_ that slippery all ambition is _ .
et mecum in curru parui uectantur amores ,
be thankful , and supply the deadly draught ;
the love that turns it , and the power it rains .
and win the heart from pain ?
grated the steel of helm and mail .
giovanni villani ; " a noble soldier , " adds benvenuto da imola . he
coward fate degen'rate man
and , having smote his master , slipt
that all with pomegranates was covered o'er
on mighty wings towards the sky ,
and found them arms again .   if he had struck me
awake ! awake thee , youth ! and send
sky and forest reeled together ,
touchinge us two , how thinges han y - stonde ;
can maceualli                       only a subject ,
of the first one 's peaceful ways ,
the sad night of her marriage day ,
i was in my attic !
to him that fluster'd his poor parish wits
to follow him beyond the drawing - room :
drooping forward from the rood
but i hid me from the maidens ,
we , silent and all - knowing .   suddenly
erasmus , he says ,
is to make of the earth a dungeon damp ,
den he caper on down to de dancin ' .
“ this fear , o deities ! makes glad my heart ;
and some ascribe the invention to a priest
arranged was the prison of gwair in caer sidi
drifting mist and a wind astray ,
race after race their honors yield ,
" and since thou so long on this matter doth prate ,
and lo ! with golden buds the twigs were set ,
jamque -- soporat enim pectus vindicta virago ;
the schipes were redy sone ,
why lengthen out thy maiden hours when fate
and the banks of the river xanthus , where i have left my wife , my
for when death befalleth man ,
out of the bosom of the air ,
for she 'd persuade they wound by chance ,
¡ qué diligencia tan biva
then , dost thou come of gentle blood ,
we made new england four .
but in my heart as there i kneeled before her ,
being your vassal , bound to stay your leisure !
a wild , sharp pain was in her eyes .
my love 's unchanged .
a little old fashioned for now ;
and overtones of thought we only know .
i told thee stories of the days of joy
his craftie feates , but that they were descride
the salt wind freshens more and more .
hearing the chick chirp , or the chick itself wanting
first , then , say what thou art . ' he instant bow'd ,
but just the thing which i desire .
spelt , and therewith mixed white barley , and tilted the
the other talking sputters ; but soon turn'd
thus far removed we shall agree,--
for so decreeing that thy clothes ' expense
and every ditch with human blood was red .
to - morrow the dreams and flowers will fade .
loud the golden cradle echoes ,
came riding as only a bushman can ride .
the pale and waning stars ,
the priests might growl , and all be lost :
by some words that were warning of doom .
and how stern boreas with impetuous hand
and noise of lumbering waggon comes no more
take , fortune , whatever you choose,--
shall we stay on this side ? " then smiled as one
to worry , and not to flee -- and -- knight or knave--
when soften'd by his love and faithfulness ,
a hebrew money - lender ;
" oh ! yes , i see it ! letty 's home is there ! "
leaving studley and hackfall and huge brimham rocks ,
nor dare lift up her countenance too bold ,
them jozerans shall lead , also godselmes .
when spiritless the body lies ; but ask'd ,
from wall and roof flash down !
and , in my dream , with silvery voice ,
he spak touchende of mariage .
she her just lord may view ,
caution and fear to highest faults have run ;
a hundred - fold be multiplied .
have listened long
not aught that , gleaned from heaven or hell ,
forgetful , though its wings are wet the while :
whan time was a tokne hath fired ;
the stately beauties of its roof and wall
cari deliciae breues patroni ,
loom sudden clouds of fault ,
undissevered for ever and ever .
within thy presbyterial bound
trug ihn der holm da zu den headorämen .
stark , keen , triumphant , till it plays at death .
rush'd on the heroes with unerring shock .
the way those infant feet must go ,
these unsightly shards of men .
when earth quick swallows , inundations sweep .
he hurried forth with joy inspired
since god first made so free with adam 's rib !
" the devil - wrangling pit
o hidden beauty , naked as a star ;
the lock is black as ink ,
wavering perfumes ,
dazed with the rainbows of our tears ,
what thanks sufficient , or what recompence
his burning bosom buttoned it with stars .
there will remain for you
and visit you . this surely will be wise . "
of jubilee to dian:--truth i heard !
reaped mit deat 's sword und reapt by dee !
preferring to preaching his fishing and fowling ;
two naked , torn with briers , in headlong flight ,
bring also your spouses , nor leave in your houses
worn in heart , a trifle weak :
' twas in the summer time so sweet ,
and the child , who knew this , smiled ,
“ now may you , each with joyful heart ,
' mong savage hordes in bush and swamp .
and leant their faces on the flat ,
to idle speeches of his natural mood :
anxious son that the wounds were only slight , and
' and were they not our _ friends _ , should swing for this . '
  all editions till that of 1743 had " at " for " from . " the home of
" there is much to enjoy , down here below ;
the world from satan and from sin ,
a rib he took from adam 's side ,
escape , but aye they visit hapless men
and place not a stone to distinguish my name ,
vot had n't got nodings on .
quae cuncta generas et regeneras indidem ,
nor through the palace did a creature move .
and so , through frost and clicking leaves ,
my thirst became the less unsatisfied .
khara the army ’s chief and pride ,
if but the larks would give me from their wings
he heard the captain cry ;
and great patroclus in short triumph bore .
nor art thou less esteem'd that i have plac'd , ii . 70 .
as swiftly , as keenly as they shine .
and think the world secure , at peace , the clock
red for new pain .
and purchased a harp ,
to send a lad to london town ,
ah , time is flying , lady -- time is flying ;
exclaim'd , up starting , " how ! said'st thou he had ?
with its warm and lingering good - bye .
light use in them that later world discerns ,
and mountains , and dark places of the earth ,
i 'd apologize here for my many digressions ,
to - day the world is wide and fair
and bring the lassie back to me
beside my saddle - bow she stood ,
the tongue unknown , the joy he can not guess ,
tell us how these first toilers , loving brothers , gained
i saw him there by the wall
the east side slashers were playing the terrors ,
alas , the one who knew it!--
my lonely house will thrill some day
that gives as freely to the shrinking weed
to seek the lady on the hill ?
foemineum , et senibus glacies non aequa rotundis :
and the silence of the sick
i stand in my room alone .
mollior nec te feriam neque intra
it was a knight of the southern land
would turn away my wandering eye ,
in so far as it served any political end we may infer from the
any excess will remain .
' is himports -- thanks , o ' course , to me--
and the lightnings lash at the shrinking trees ,
like a seraph she can sing ,
behind the valley topmost gargarus
i guess , ' twas frightful there to see
at his napkin -- glanced evasively at the side-
last week , at the duchess 's ball ,
but he drank wine .
for that holy piece of bread
i recognized the latent genius in you ,
and twice he thought , " gave i not charge
lake of esthwaite , on a desolate part of the shore ,
thou'rt meditation 's constant friend ,
like yon star that livelier gleams
and leave me blest .
along the road in three wagons to drive .
because the white - faced mandarin
ode for general washington 's birthday
" o lady cloud , why are you weeping ? " i said .
of all these signs , dear brother , each
the next proud lamos ' stately towers appear ,
a dream of pearly weather ,
and make heavenly minstrelsy
why so dull and mute , young sinner ?
no boy , ... the letters are not such as ours .
a heaving , sinking of the boughs ,
out just beyond the loud - voiced town
then eastward of that he continued his plan ,
know this , lorenzo ! ( seem it ne'er so strange )
the wife of doryclus is this : lo , godhead 's beauty there !
oh ! the minutes of yonder maddening ride ,
he bides in calmness the silent morrow ,
well , let them make
and now i am eager to die into the deathless .
exclaiming -- his parents were irish--'begorry !
seem closing together as a book that is read :
and hey ! the beeches burgeoned .
as a dare - gale skylark scanted in a dull cage
but why like witless children stand we here
to noon he fell , from noon to dewy eve ,
and like one living seems he to conduct him . "
bury me deep when i am dead ,
a youth that stood with his ómare , one of the daily guard ,
from honey buried underneath my feet ,
arrays the crews , and takes the bravest there
high o'er their heads sweet beauty 's queen displayed
but the lips that kissed , and the arms that caressed ,
yet thae uncovenanted shavers
and lubricate your fancy
got him by something he had on
but yet the gentler passion is the stronger .
tell the grassy hollow that holds the bubbling well - spring ,
hope wreathed her mouth with smiles , and she exclaimed :
the eternal goodness more than lives of truth and love .
soar upward to the sun !
and left her in despair
berate me who will -- i am content .
grasps the sampo in her talons ;
yea , and with sanction of almighty zeus ,
fresh - painted , rather smart than otherwise !
i am the barque that chains delay :
and woman bake the bread ;
that beat the two of them incessantly
should burn in utmost hell a million years !
see the purple splendor o'er the island streaming ,
gave greatest cause to grieve .                 g.
what my soul prompts , and what some god commands .
the friend of my age .   let the present release
my final victory proves the gods appeased .
justly the price of worthlessness they paid ,
and well the plenteous freight supplied the host :
and loves a little boy like me .
when autumn stands ' mid the dropping nuts ,
it died as the hunt went down the dip ,
so throw its portals wide again ,
and trust its meaning to the flattering eye
to lift his hands , to gasp , to try
that 's sweetly play'd in tune !
urge him with truth to frame his wise replies ,
upon his father 's sword ,
for i would change each hour , like them ,
peaceful , pleasant melodies ,
in the only way in which an editor
such were the conditions of the peasantry of the great italian
which it now bears .
no pretty head reclines its golden bands
o slumber on , untaught to feel
her house in piccadilly , two doors from air street . '
nor bites the johnnie ,
the gods will grant to labour , when it pays
her eyes the blistering tears ;
and didst thou play in heaven with all
with all the hawthorn blossom ,
while time doth remain ,
the thunderbolt shakes into shivers all
do n’t blame thi mother :
i woke in the golden sunshine , the birds were singing aloud .
i saw her at the blossom - time ,
they hate us , as beelzebub hates holy - water !
--up and to your looms , lads . "
just strike a light and tumble out ;
a flit or hold you still ,
by such a youth in the green shade
" nay , ' tis clear
' " lady , methinks that all the goodly - greaved achaeans will
he hath tofore the court excused .
covered with danger ; but those succeeding seem to be wise even
dearest and best of maidens , whom the fates
and a captive
and we , down - heartened , prayed a silent prayer ,
the snake of lightning
" my name is fun -- your cronie dear ,
the virtues hide their vanquished fires
may one not speed her but in phrase askance ?
o cuckoo ! shall i call thee bird ,
how on his head so soft , so delicate ,
straightway was a magic vessel
your form shall be the image of your mind ;
and heard the chimes of midnight 's tone .
from my hair i lost the silver ,
aught so profoundly mournful or so lone !
we talk of devil , but the word is tame ;
but yesterday , in merry mood ,
_ s_o shalt thou reyne with hym in heaven above .
gabble and hiss , but heroes seek release
thou knowest it , for indeed thou never lackest
with flowers and music , greeting him by name ,
flaming sparks , instead of seed ,
and ye fresh boyes , that tend upon her groome ,
she will not be sick to see me if i only keep it clean :
' this is not a fit match , ' quoth bold robin hood ,
away went gilpin -- who but he ?
and unappeased , unhonour'd , unbesought ,
god at the end of troubles , that the dreary
till christmas next return .
and , filled with doubt , denied her daughter rest .
was all the sound we heard .
seemed mourning for the dead ; for , on that day ,
to the darksome sariola ;
on wood by thomas bewick for bulmer 's ' poems of
not the whole nation perish ?   what is death ?
then sank the sun with dying flame ,
to see their summits towering high above .
through the damp and dusk of evening
lemminkainen 's faithful mother
from your sage counsels what effects arise !
and when captain sword got up next morn ,
spain had the mountains -- mountains flow like clouds .
these the pleasures unalloy'd ,
than leave to a neighbour their ministration .
he yaue his sonnys , as ye may here ,
our kynge was never so sore agast ,
ruddy youth , and arrant scoundrel ,
the brisk attendants to his aid , with whom
believe me , ' twas in pity , not in fear .
covetous parson , for his tithes destraining ?
love with you , and been in the dog - days stung
since we now are here together ,
fame , health and money go ,
with emulation , and desire
has been missing for a week .
" stand forth the bravest of our host ! ( he cries )
i know this quest of yours and free intent
periods , he greets us with a quantity of thumb - ring posies.--and
spake for the world against this heart ; or rings
an open , earnest , honest look ,
nor was praeneste 's founder wanting there ,
should make trial in the steadings , but that we should see
that round and round the linden blossoms play ;
my jealous ears grew whist;--
it mingled strangely with my fears ,
sir charles , so generous and kind ,
and far away i think i almost hear
nor longer in the dark can hide , nor bear
an only child , once comfort of my pains ,
above , was still the same .
coerced by furies who persuaded me
clean my rooms , as temples be ,
and the monks finished what the goths begun .
to gain the gift of deeper seeing ;
docile , religious , passion - free .
rank vapours , gathering , on my comrades seize ,
what need to tell ? fit language there is none
grow , my song , like a tree ,
aft bure the gree , as story tells ,
his answer to the chief ’s request :
i noticed on the margin of a pool
as if all the erth were nat suffycyent
their watters munnot bide ;
while flow'ry dreams my soul employ ;
i will never court a smile ;
oh welcome , welcome back to life 's free breath--
and a resolute endeavor
" haste thee , talthybius ! summon with all speed
" well -- to the secrets of my soul thy love
yama - guchi , she knows , leads the twins by the nose ,
i see the heather of the strath ,
you 'll be more cautious how you brag again .
kiss me , then ,
roll on , roll on , you restless waves ,
the evangelist you pastors had in mind ,
the dearest rites of love ; there in the cool
to take the helm in hand ,
and its treasures strewn on the silver sand .
i , stung with grief , thus spake :   " o say , my guide !
oh bitter wind with icy invisible wings
about a " fire " our little village had
where flow'd a limpid stream with murmuring noise ,
the sacrifice required . go also one
that dyes but wo n't surrender ;
for rauysshynge chaste lucres agaynst hyr assent .
" bring a skiff ; thou son of northland ,
but oh ! that one resistless smile !
that thee is sent , receyve in buxumnesse ;
whose voice seem'd faint through long disuse of speech .
his reluctant marriage in cuba .
my heart is not much greener ; and , in short , i
a triple woe to me .
their thefts in the dust .
it sang the song again :
my heart is the dial ;
why lose we life , in anxious cares ,
in weal or woe , in this world below ,
there are the lives that lighten from above
" she heard it , the victorious west ,
in his sleigh he seats the virgin ,
where streams of lucid crystal flow !
when old hens noise and cackle every where
ilmarinen hastens forward
( who would believe it ? ) amid mass and prayer .
that was her music utter it , and still
if thou regardest this conclusion well ,
once , at the district meeting , the good old farmer bowles
mysteriously engrafted
not all the winds that stir the mighty sea
tell , for you can , what is it to be wise ?
to hope the best , is pious , brave , and wise ;
and in the gorgeous woods he often knelt
how oft to thee the female form doth owe
and , groaning from the bottom of his breast ,
i marked the clash and clangor of his soul .
to his sleep went hiawatha ,
up then rose this proud sheriff ,
countries , and that the mother of it in all nations was devotion .
from my low huts of fir .
deliverance and was the saviour of mankind . yet this was only a
the silver clouds disparted ;
i would have given then the bar of gold
the shrill one - pounders plow--
point to which intrepid sages have attained .
too harsh , who god 's mild laws for chains esteem ,
i felt you push , i heard you call ,
and mark yon rocky walls that stand
stream , named the archiano , which rises in the apennine above the
and patches bright of bracken green ,
see , he bathes thy feet , all bleeding ,
temperament .
alone molests me ; and it is that i
that fears not anything .
the swans , on milk - white pinions , spring away ,
keen pleasure and keen grief
i do n't defend them . ' twas a serious act ,
these moths flying into the dormitory . it frequently robs hives ,
i call to mind where wander'd and how look'd
through which the inmate gains or leaves the den .
over campfires of sagebrush and oak ;
for deeath to don his cowl ,
shot from the western cliff , released the weary team .
the enemies of truth ; who then shall guide
soldiers , be just and true !
all others that within me meet and blend .
and unburied remain
young conradine an innocent victim slew ,
of their dear praise ,
see , closed are the curtains , the lights
but the laugh at the long run will carry it hollow .
before my spring i garnered autumn 's gain ,
the green of shimmering robe and glint
" no , little lady , we can not do that ,
they quit their wonted steads .
i shall be celia 's everlastingness .
striking through all their ranks th ' eternal lyre ,
my path will not be near to thine through life,--
a thousand beauties never seen before
woman , graceful as the swan ,
umpires are used to hiding -- they do n't mind .
the others were done ere they started
of patriarchs and of prophets rose sublime ,
thou art the saviour god who wore
may buy a mansion in belgravia ,
is but a wreath from thee .
when asked why women wrote better novels than men , mr . richard le
( and afterward , as bards of yore have told ,
the little leaves that yesterday
e'er practis'd archery .
an ' lips fair assin'(3 ) for kisses ,
old king latinus , seated by his child
no limit , measur'd by itself alone .
meals - vittles up , jes any day ,
and it was with deepest wonder
diocletian 's palace . ( described in the 13th chapter of
and no feel love 's sharp pang , annie ;
i tell you a tale to - night
king george the second sent a man called general wolfe , you know ,
in thee abide not without war ; and one
next prays not only with that tartar knight
sat down in the farthest corner ,
we 'll rouse the nodding grove ;
but she was not the woman whom
the clouds are gone , and all the sky is bright ;
have followed freedom 's flowing pennon ,
reason , god 's revelation shows to faith ,
then downe she stricken fell with clap of thonder ,
resigned my sword and started for the west . "
until his death he had not caused
up - blazing rose , like a young cypress - tree
while nature holds her court of love ,
is like the gold where sunlight plays
with the fierce kabibonokka ,
dress thy countenance , twice divine !
' tis of your flesh , and that you use
of all sounds on earth , dearest sound to me .
the glorious structure , by the hands
on that shagged and shaly
with her wise answer satisfied :
and proceeded under the shadow of his creator , covered
the direful monster from afar descried ;           }
drifting , and dreamed it true .
the unfeeling sun is shining bright ,
or gareth telling some prodigious tale
like semele , when she was turned to ashes .
then joy thrilled through vaśishṭha ’s breast
two sticks and an apple ,
" awaked at last , we found the waves had stranded
o faithful worthies ! resting far behind
over the pasture and the valley , to the new hampshire town ....
and namely toward the grete ,
of his high vision made him vehement :
i thought but of healing . he was angelical .
nor seek again the dance we left of late .
' but ' twas a famous victory . '
hark to the summons !
she kept with chary care .
aventorr{es } gan he take
are gracious with goddesses glowing and gleaming--
peasants love not those who scorn them ;
of my resistless fury spread ;
ta mere ne fut point la maitresse d'un coche ;
and therefore have induced your grace to see
her nose and chin they threaten ither--
for toys all round were tossed ,
musing , setting to a haunting air in one vague reverie
nec tamen haec ratio facinus defendere pergit
of being inhabited , yet all their art
to his grim idol .   him the ammonite
and silence , like that of the tomb ,
her pleasures , " thought i ; " o , it is so good
" achilles ! save yourselves ! " but i--
yo soñé esta trasnochada ,
when i was ill and she was pale
blue gray as seas in summer ,
to dry the rain on my storm - beaten face ,
too prurient for a proof against the grain
who but the sons of freedom 's land ,
learned the words of ancient wisdom ,
i was aye glowerin ' in at the yett !
virgin , type of holiness ,
support , and ornament of virtue 's cause .
" oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
so for a time i watched ,
_ stammer _ , stumble , etc . sw . _ stämma _ , to dam .
shelley , p. b. , xcvi , clxvii
while mighty william 's thundering arm prevailed ,
slew both , ere yet the down of blooming youth
unfortunately , the least necessary , a provost - marshal .
triumphant waved our flag one day --
but that this erthe in this erthe
nor anchor dropped at eve or morn ;
have ventured all upon a throw ;
acamas ' temple , and hurled him to the ground .
vot comes in france too late a day
the young warm passion nursed no thought of shame ;
" i heard the water lapping on the crag ,
drove away as an enchanter ,
yet nil he with him - self thus maken stryf .
and now they tried the deed to hide ;
where early in the every day the dew shakes and shines .
you should have been here yesterday . "
beyond his love and care .
window and door give free admission .
flowing between lydia and caria ; it was said to have 600 windings
and still upon that face i look ,
to palwoinen 's rooms uncovered .
in foreign realms ( for thou hast travell'd far )
an ' twa red peats wad bring relief ,
for each at their ' pointed times i yearn .
the towering eagle , darting from above ,
which made them whip , and bitterly cry the while ,
« ¿ juráis que á ese tirano , cuyo imperio
of the " future " of poverty flat .
while , glossy as gold from a fairy - land mine ,
are filling their cups with the rhenish wine ,
why stayest thou from thy wonted place ?
voice of the glens and hills ;
it is the caliph 's glorious armament .
bajo un cielo purísimo se mecen ?
i shall not see her :   you will go ;
_ aim of heyne ’s translation . _
eyes stern as steel yet tender as a fawn's,--
of marlowe 's poem that was left half - sung ,
teach me to pray .
save for a nimble shadow that crouches
o breath of god !   o my delight
or guilt , that humbly would express
to hear such speech was hagen / in sooth right glad of heart ;
thy native vale in glorious days of old ,
blood - coloured oaks , that stand against a sky of gold and brass ;
while grazing sheep on hillside near ,
he 'll treat with sneering scorn
as men of breeding , sometimes men of wit ,
with evil thoughts the monsters rove ,
must hither in their gladness come .
as the moss is in the sea .
o god , give me repentance and accept my excuses ,
shakespeare . did they ever ' spell ruin to managers ' if they were ,
but bade together with the mother kill ,
the half - eastern blood , which appear'd to bequeath
kits , cats , sacks , and wives ,
" this instant will i go . "
cheer our sick heart and purchase ease ?
reserved , o large - eyed prince , for thee . ”
that lie between , have heard the huge - nibbed pen
the wooers were loosened , and their hearts were enchanted
it was the flood - tide and the even - tide --
' ay me , ' quoth venus , ' young , and so unkind !
tu mihi supremae praescribta ad candida calcis , etc .
but with her piercing cry the king awoke ,
between the temples clave the forehead of his foe .
amid life 's thorny path o ' care .
and so tall the doorway , hardly
the stars have wrought their anklets of light to deck thy feet ,
to walk the world forever for my sake ,
to rid her mind of muscles and to fix
then guha , at the sight distressed ,
looked with two great eyes of wonder ,
" great praise the duke of marlborough won ,
quoth she ,
that instant , i declare , he has my love :
intervals of half a mile , until a hundred have passed .
an ' sometimes half our hair is scorched away--
some vestal whose virtue no tongue dare impugn
" nine from eight " .
and his sinewy fingers smarting ,
rose - red
when cometh the morrow .
at thought of grievous sorrow / suffered at his hand :
he said , " a thousand . "
with lesser crimes the halls of hell are paved .
her return to her native climate seconded the effects of inward
i wolde neveremore have wif . "
showing things it would please me to own ,
' fearless encounters danger and disaster ,
" but who art thou , that questionest about us ? "
with a love that could take me roast or fried
to its own hue whate'er comes near ,
never since hath eye beheld it -- never since hath mortal , dazed
obedience is the courtesy due to kings . '
i think , oh my love ! ' tis thy voice from the kingdom of souls ,
that were too bright to last .
b. trade it may help , society extend .
" in my youth , " father william replied to his son ,
of ascapart , and bevis bold ,
bristling , and in the midst , the open sand .
teats , small quantities .
but , lo ! when peace with union glory , came ,
all hail to thee , most high borean lord !
that they surcease not ever , day nor night ,
pardon my rude tongue , if i chance to erre ,
farr otherwise , transported i behold ,
throw out sparks than the circles sparkled . every scintillation
then , with my escort joined , i moved along .
because that living light , which from its fount
then turn'd them back , directed on the light
anon night comes , and with her wings brings things
to let them know , and make them feel
and a bird , with shining feathers ,
doth the spirit of man e'en then rest ?
and while self - love each jealous writer rules ,
some wait the afternoon .
" strange hopes and fears for what shall be but nought
oh ! is it fourpence , or piebald , or gray ?
the which i must confesse and also leave ,
till the loose hair drops its masses brown
and more than this world would presume .
to ocean , lord of stream and brook ,
the showery rain ,
go to the river tavern , i should say .
may drive at the windows,--we'll laugh at his din ;
though they journeyed very slowly ,
with foulest flavor , while the thrice shocked ear ,
highlands of scotland and the western islands ; it prefers the
dangling his devil 's foot ,
polish'd neck , and radiant eye ;
i know not if i should have seen that day .
and beg to hide them in a herd of swine ,
but the man was color blind ,
illume the glorious clouds of every hue
on us , on us the unswerving season smiles
now may'st thou see , my son ! how brief , how vain ,
and thus an airy point he won ,
dimly the soft and musing form is seen
sitting in a net !
out of the hills
when arnold himself will in triumph return !
it seemed the ocean thundered ,
your soul is forfeit to those agencies ,
ghastly tracts of ice and whirlwind lying in a dim , blind zone ,
unconsciously he raised his cry ,
the wind that night was cold and keen ,
i fought with fate . but now the flag is torn
our homes and hearthstones are so near the same ,
thronged thick with men pursuing and fugitives ,
will they stake yet more , tho ' your heart be set
_ viii . _ _ the story of an exile _                _ 93 _
not a kiss in life ; but one kiss , at life 's end ,
" one morn i missed him on the customed hill ,
the bright - eyed mariner .
in form then of a pure white rose the holy host was shown to me ,
suddenly waking the silent night ,
from undoing ourselves in plaistering old sores ;
and bonie castle - gordon .
bent o'er his brow , and with ambrosial kiss
i will not swim again in a sea of doubt ,
to be served by parsons of flesh and blood , )
and thus bespoke her husband : " shall , " she said ,
a thousand crows , thick - roosting , on its limbs ;
despair , a serpent ’s mortal bite ,
my hand kaikeyí ’s blood would spill ,
allah is great , no doubt , and juxtaposition his prophet .
follow her lovely footsteps home .
blow roses till they touch , silk leaf to leaf ,
across the darkness of the night !
compose your trembling hearts , ' twill all be well .
ah , this is what i 'm wanting--
ed ? ) have no intention of paying their debts !
lo , thus thetis the cause ladde ,
for gentle brotherhood , the harmony
and stripped off the bridle right anon .
sistra ? quid in uacuo secubuisse toro ?
press me to marry again immediately , wait -- for i would not have
no , no , thou wilt see , what a moment it lasts ,
to write in " _ the keepsake _ , " as sure as you 're there ! !
save born anew -- born of a dual birth ,
" along the side , where barrier none arose
_ edition limited to thirty copies _ .
rose - red the brambles that the passing wind knows ,
that this great servant of a righteous cause
through groves of nightshade dark and dern ,
of farthest britain in its many miles .
but it meant such desolate years .
not dreamin ' the job could miscarry ,
second , azariah ; the third was mishael , chosen of the lord .
then we long may share god 's favor--
and the married men played on it ,
cheat at marbles any more ,
vaunting his glorious origin from jove ,
for lilly -- thirteen - two and bay--
while from each terrace , house , and tower
whither shall i betake me , where subsist ?
of the joy - inspiring      springs he tasteth
_ happy , happy , happy pair ! _
the welcome news , and bring him to the town .
whisper each to each , and leap and sink .
your watch -- if you have sense to . "
some happy theme and murmured round
cloyed have submerged me . "
what i beheld , i say ; i add not , i ,
or , far removed from light of day ,
to guard the syrup from too great a heat .
how in the whiteness of the sunlight sleep
et fulcire cibus , cibus omnia sustentare .
love lies dead !
the cellar is quite black with coal ,
when thy sweet speech i shall hearken ,
eternal through itself .
so close , they must have seemed but one ,
the traitor braves the king 's command !
of loftier lore , than mine !
love swells like the solway , but ebbs like its tide,--
another said , " i 'll be a clown ;
and cease from angry strife , that so the greeks
ah , she 's out now and must pay
content -- no doubt!--most times doth dwell
of a nation 's crime
under the limbs of mammoths went the path ,
enough for them to slay me once !   while i
and many a noble knight was slain ,
that now have taken flight
he sought in pray'r the daughter dread of jove ,
let the star - clusters grow ,
for death from sin no power can separate .
i am weak , but he is strong ,
and feels with rage divine his bosom glow ;
euphorion of chalcis , alexander , stesichorus , and the people of
i would i had let alone you two !
the sailor who climbs and ascends to the yard
brave offspring of hypirochus ; he dwelt
the blossom of your fame is blown ,
should be to see my father 's glad return .
yet let the friend be dear .
you take to preaching ! i was a fool to worry
wha for thy sake wad gladly die ?
men build and plan , but the soul of man ,
to return an old ewe that was ill of the rot ,
nor peaceful requiem sing ,
that cares in every shape ,
calder , a. , insurance manager .
while in the sky a thousand fleece of gold
i wot , who die in strong traivelling ?
down he descended strait ; the speed of gods
the rest was craggy cliff , that overhung
the sweetest song - birds nestle in a pair ;
dawn on our darkness and lend us thine aid !
of helicon , the wild - eyed muse descends
by the golden illusions he flings in her way .
some gnome her lover be ! where cross - roads meet ,
leaves are greygreen ,
and would have damned , destroyed , what christ came down
by the wings , that this is cupid .
bow to that elder , though seeing him bow
jack knows what brings gain or loss ,
with this portentous bridge the dark abyss .
the years that lie between us
so calls , a sunward - singing lark ,
never knew them , nor will he ever know them .   they
  [ " gems wrought into drinking - vessels , among which the least
who was on action hurl'd ,
canto xliii . kausalyá ’s lament .
safely home according to your desire . i will now present you
with fixed heed , suspense and motionless ,
was seen by e'er a mortal , / or yet a crown did wear . "
who yonder hangs the sinners on his hook . "
and one , where with new loveliness
above this earthly atmosphere .
speaking of heresy with flashing eye ,
along the piney forests on the shore
with lifted hands and eyes , invokes relief ;
the hard condition ; but that she would loose
as the world rushed by on either side .
wherewith i claimed rather than begged my tools ,
great caesar , who in asia 's utmost bounds
which this day in papal vestments
and seen on shelves beneath me grope
this is her thought , that everywhere
some old man , bent almost double ,
the simple remedy is found
on the curb - stone the space of a minute ,
the names of great actors and plays he would tell ;
once kindled , it will ne'er depart ,
vision of beauty ! there floats not a cloud
i love my love!--as april on the hill
" look down from your niches , ye still saints , and see
i fain would steal away , with noiseless tread ,
let the giddy - brain'd times turn round ;
graceful is every thing from her ;
as though they feared to waken her : at length ,
you talk too polite altogether ;
our guns are a league behind us , our target a mile below ,
though mother would sometimes protest with a sneer
for the grand slaughter ne’r began till then ,
and now they meet across the vale .
an ' ye found that th ' pink still blossomed there .
" what did ye wi ' the bonny beads ,
her brow ' neath her raven hair gleams , just as if
with woody mountains like a net .
songmen , grasshoppers and nightingales
far in the purple valleys of illusion
in the lack of christian hope ,
one flame , one altar , and one choir ;
stern warriors of castile ! touch not their gods .
but age is peevish still ,
and battle laughed
that haste were more becoming thee than them . "
where silver streamlets roved ,
are sworne to blood , and keepe togither must .
poets could not praise too much .
their inefficient catalogue .
and tears of awful wonder ran
" but , " said the lady , doubtingly , " here is a dedication to the
this life is like a field of flowering thyme ,
his quick suspicion ?   did fiametta see
and whispered with moist lips against my ear
because the road was steep and long
ther was no wiht , if he hem syhe ,
vvith this , hee seekes a russet - coated tree ,
silver and blue and green were showing .
in the wilderness
come to the meadows and learn to love ! "
and unpoetic eye ;
for all beyond is peace , " he said .
" then shall we tell
from woods no glimmer enters in ,
tra lee !
by all the muses ! thou shalt be
the difference between sin and goodness is no delusion ,
ille leuis stipulae sollemnis potus aceruos
and a delighted world received their thoughts
through which their forms uncouth , like buffaloes
the ramillies will be no more !
of a story , that is told
and brought such ills upon us .
incident . "
how , with heaven - born health imbued ,
the animal spirits , that from pure blood arise
with him when it should be seasoned . now when we saw it we
nought better can betide a martial soul
the seemul , gorgeous as a bride ,
if it trickle drops of water ,
thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye .
of liberty 's crimson hue ;
each dwelling in its turn prepared to leave
lived under the hill ,
and choice , not fate , hath kept you maid--
seeing the heav'ns thus bounteous to thee , i
harsh gateways startled at a sound ,
which ne'er might be repeated : who could guess
in his lone tower and ultimate despair ,
and light o'er harvest - plain and garnered sheaf--
as on a bee shut in a crystalline ;
when we beheld the new sun arise in his earliest splendor ,
and new - found colours of the world like wine .
_ prometheus . _ i grant it , choose now : shall i name aloud
grave , florid , stern , as far as eye could see .
his thoughts in the dawn ;
nor from what guiltless victim 's head--
but to poor shepherds ' homespun things ;
watch and you 'll see the departure of summer ,
“ baucis beheld philemon shoot in leaves ,
and , wordsworth , both are thine : at certain times ,
thus were surly master led
a very ancient crone ;
shrieking , and stretching forth to me their arms
ionian sea . it was of very great height ; whence homer calls it
then the money paid at lloyd 's caught her by the heel ,
i held her then to myself .
i am fain to press my lips now ,
our lives in sleep are some like streams thet glide
when they saw him thus depart ;
his oghne bodi forto lese ,
from wicked men like thee . go , go ! i deem
fair economy 's rules he brings to his view ,
with whom the weak sure refuge find ,
and their hoof - beaten bosoms are trod to the plain .
' why , collatine , is woe the cure for woe ?
argument against paganism . see coleridge , classic poets , p. 64 . ]
limping slowly to the service ,
we welcome thee , o heavenly grace ! be thou our constant guide ;
to shake their bodies and start from off the ground ,
we 'll lean us on my highland plaid .
charge ym in the van ,
out of all nations , and whose pride the proud
time 's wallet : a novel told in letters .   by lucy dale and g. m.
and evere mor and mor coveite .
where they 'd for centuries slept , broke loose ,
not passing three years old ;
in glory and in strength are waking !
what thou dost wish to hear , for i have seen it
a ship is floating in the harbor now ;
and quickly to the south they went ;
she gleaned from breton grandames , when a child ,
“ i may demand , who would not , ask'd , refuse .
were founded for the holy seat , whereon
stood waiting around the world - governing one ,
tak thair ane a b c ;
into their vision covetous and sly !
followed the sounds , and ever and again ,
i stop and listen for a voice strong , tender ,
great ajax saw , and own’d the hand divine ;
and -- i'll not conceal it--
thy saviour trod !
the roses of their life , they love them faded ,
poke out the nests and block up the holes !
thou sore labrest to engender debate
lone and drear and desolate ,
and hidden in her inmost bower
who couldst , unmoved by terror , brook
and one hath felt the satyr 's eyes
shall live in accents shaped of blood - warm breath ,
short and sweet , and we 've come to the end of it--
yet not so much but that when into sight
he tore his beard and loud he wept .
and kist him with hir softe lippe ,
the surface upwards left the depths unmoved .
noe nor at any time would she
while the years wax and wane
in the palace - hall ,
may be a storm , and wreck
on sundays you can see them spread
do thou , sumitrá ’s son , precede :
troy -- of rare riches and valor possessed ,
he has served , both as warrior and priest ;
clamorous with clubs of leven , and anon ,
sive astrum hoc pueri fronte sub aetherea .
and partly ' twas a bashful art
heaven be merciful to us all , sinners as we be !
and states shall move free limbed , loosed from war 's cramping
mystic , ardent , dowered with beauty ,
holds disputation with each thing she views ,
nor think that thou in this my book art worst , ii . 159 .
i tell you gold is the cause of war ,
the realm has been greatly increased
into white clouds in the heavens ;
sorrow shall fade and the world be brighter .
traffics , who would have returned to simifonti , there where his
bot why the fyres suche semen
of other care they little reckoning make ,
send it to yesterday .
returns a solitary tone,--
shields , arms , and spears flash horribly from far ;
clasp of somber night ,
" whether ' t is nobler -- nobler -- nobler-- "
the lank wolf in the wood      and the wan raven ,
but libbaty 's a kind o ' thing
and the snake had tongues a thousand ,
eternity beneath , on high ,
the various tricks which servants play'd , }
from thence he went to absequoit ,
who sighed for justice -- liberty -- repose ,
were turn'd to swine , which fed all day
rising far up in midmost realm of day ,
_ papegau _ , _ papegay _ . sp . _ papagayo _ , parrot .
but a faint influence and could bless or hurt
cruel things that man may not name ,
then from his anvil the lame artist rose ;
whiles , ranging like a roarin lion ,
apology unto the duke for me ;
a second , there is none , to his enclos'd
o'er spirits will he
with every shaft some hostile victim slew ,
' e keeps ' is side - arms awful : ' e leaves 'em all about ,
when they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal { 32 }
she swells her high heart - cheering tone .
oft have we known that seven - fold fence to fail ,
keeps on the ground the vital countenance
and gazed hungrily o'er , and the blood from his back
and begged us all to pay attention
my ultimate valleys where solitude reigns ;
' gainst all in fearless fighting , who the truth will not seek:--
rests the bruised serpent of sin .
of peace on earth , good - will to men !
and the bride ,
but blest the ear
and with the shaft o'erturns him on the field
of wild rose and hawthorn and honeysuckle boughs :
with my friends may i share what today may afford ,
the strange delusion wrought upon my soul
blown by the winds of a dream .
_ lizzy _ . if she gets him , her lot'll be hard to bear .
there to find the harp a master .
de lo que fezistes abredes soldada .
the brave mists that waver and wane
blest whom the sweets of home - felt quiet please ;
room for all the dead in kalma ,
best qualities appear ! my own vanity would be greater if i
thee , too , enamoured of the life i loved ,
had never through the gateway strayed ,
and he shall be hang'd to - morrow .
" and , for he venteth not , nor slakes his mood ,
green bursts out on every herb ,
father 's life was big and splendid ,
under the violets , under the clover ,
nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile ,
a coronet of green oak cerriall < 66 >
and with me still as in crystal glassed
" i will only give my daughter ,
some lay at length , some found a seat ;
soon as the day begins to waste ,
for when maids think of love ( as maidens do )
she , a stranger to distresses ,
so now the kings to rest them were to their chambers led .
by means of this , some wonder shall appear ,
" within this dungeon buried shalt thou spend
still with your curls , and kiss the time away .
the ardour of sacrifice , before i knew
when the stormy winds do blow ;
" and waves shall rush in crimson to the deep ,
' si pereo hominum manibus periisse iuvabit-- '
that i was right and you were wrong .
pertisum hominem , non pertaesum dices . '
twixt the anvil and the hammer .
to conscienceless sin in the earth ,
i look'd lang at the ha ' ,
let him seek his own home wherever it be ;
the peasant too , a witness of his song ,
an ’ her whirlin ’ of the dust ,
believe it . mary,--oh ! believe
where , then , is molly , who 's no more with me ?
for diomed ’s brass arms , of mean device ,
sound :
he thought it an honour the trowel to hold ,
than pacience it oversit
of her owne people led with warlike rage ,
began to parch that temperate clime.--xii . 632 - 36 .
as for the rest of the world , it languished away , while ceres ,
and some your rip - van - winkle glance ,
perseus et ceti subeuntis uerberat ora .
ah , fumid pipe , i thank you hour by hour
yea , life - long ; such life as we have ,
although no doubt it was beyond all price .
glistening in the silver sunshine ,
they would not , in the name of christ , have mixed
twice , thrice did he rise , and as often she thought
it was god heard my vows and the church sealed the bond .
me yet a second fall ? wee'd try our strengths :
when other butchers no meat could sell ,
the stubborn questing for a phantom shore ,
' t is the path we oft have stolen
god sent his messenger the rain ,
may direct my faithful people
brimmed up with dews and fire , with wine and saffron .
but he who dwells where weaklings congregate ,
" where stout earl william was of old . "
and him who breaks the quarry - ledge ,
then he scouted and he raided ,
i never can get back by day ,
when lo ! this ghost appears , plump to their view ,
how i wonder what you are !
of the dark future come appalling round ;
that rather thou hast cast me out with _ her _
but of white lights there were none in all the visible . and i
till the heart swells to think of the gladness
like these , old sturdy trees and stems of oak .
zeus .               again destroy them !
all song of the woods is crushed like some
gleamed through the smoke , and at my right
and ruined him whom all held dear ,
oh plunge me deep in love -- put out
and saw a cross beside him , and on the cross a form ;
in the murmurous pine - wood
yes , into life 's deep stream !
the woodpecker knocks ,
forced from the navy , yet the fight maintains .
so thrilling and sincere as thine !
almighty , yet before me no one fears :
the cup of plenty running o'er ,
concord , ... defend us thy humble servants
these with their hopes , with their sweet secrets those ,
like a torch in restless air .
' i '   said the beetle
this the marten deftly gathered ,
up the street came the rebel tread ,
and undebauched .   but we have bid farewell
his cheeks bepimpled , red and blue ;
according to lumsden , ii . 269 .
what is it , then , to have , or have no wife ,
_ moorlan _ , of or belonging to moors .
wherfore i aduyse the to note intentifly
there he showed his ware ;
i did -- i spoke it o'er and o'er--
floating on the azure air ,
so smokers , at the magpie met ,
to lyre and lute and harp ;
its forests vast and hoar , and prairies wide ,
haply he dwelt , and so from fane to fane
i took a pair of eggs once at a neighbor's--
if your ways would be ways of pleasantness ,
el puñal de catón , la adusta frente
the love too lavishly bestow'd on this ,
never a wreck on its shore .
leaving mine isled self behind it far ,
directing upon vanity your foreheads !
what the fine gentleman wore yesterday ;            }
ah , in the very middle of her lay ,
but plucking had sadly deform'd her ;
make the others follow mine ,
sank , and the red moon rose .
if this should be , i say if this should be--
cum alio cantat , at tamen alii suo dat digito litteras .
as to - morrow from the other side the queen of england sends her
which , likeliest , thou hast learn'd ; for greater praise
then followed tears,--like autumn rain .
the cold world sleeping at our feet ,
the shower of sunshine that 's her hair , the sheen
smile through the curve of flesh or moulded clay ,
and one day we met in the road ,
and over the high lands and over the low ,
he saw the saracen seize his sword ;
now crawling , forming a wet track ,
when the statue , by heaven 's grace ,
blue be it : this blue heaven
which is the theme i yearn to in my verse ?
agenor so , antenor 's godlike son ,
and sítá , ráma ’s darling wife ,
and spite of knowing nods and blinking ,
en sueño y en olvido sepultado :
' i 'm blest if that ai n't him . '
vielmehr darnach mit sorgfalt gestrebt , die versbildung des
then , when i gave my person and my throne ,
let the rich lady
the ant was punished , and his hoard--
she should from him receive than that she prayed .
you would come just the same .
shall go , till thou to a hill be passed .
sandalphon stands listening breathless
under her cloudie covert both retir'd ,
dear , patient christ , who listeneth hour on hour ,
altera maternos exaequat turba libones ,
wherein believing , he endur'd no more
and heart and home elate ;
urge , towards the table 's centre ,
" i have triumph'd .   the question your eyes would imply
met in their first fresh upward gaze by love ,
hearts , like fruit upon the stem ,
offer'd in laurel - juice blue flies
we , we , the sanctities of old
the building of the church to me , the work
and taking them about each dainty wrist
led eve our credulous mother , to the tree
watched , noting down each prayer he made ,
the lowest place only in respect to the earth whereon we tread ,
" life without it is not worth
to hannibal and wellington -- to follow whom i chose ,
and ye in armes bisy , day by day .
had , brightened his branches gray ,
christ 's nature merely human , with such faith
and yet that kisse god wot did little good ,
beautiful childhood , oh ! glad is the sight
but i smile back , in airy nonchalance,--
no maiden was by their side ! "
the divine , of aspiration to heavenly joys , breathes in
down to the earth , and these were made a sign
when she did an old husband chuse ,
she meant to usurp , for this morning at least ,
against all manoeuvre apparently proof ,
it is n't the fact that you 're dead that counts ,
if ' tis not his , ' t may be the spir't of sack ;
the value in proportion of all things ,
over dews , over sands ,
whose every ripple as it curls
in health of body , peace of mind ,
" all that stood dark and drear before the eye
o glad was i to hear .
go therefore on , and listen as thou go'st . "
i love a simple song
was searching in the dust to find his head ;
swankies , strapping fellows .
makes its mark
“ how will the gods and saints partake
fires being lighted in towers or houses of any description:--
de dollar wouldn ' pass , so i throwed it in de grass .
such music , dashing all his smiles with tears ,
and riding past a cross whereon
i send my salt , my sacrifice
and , here and there , a solitary tree ,
with pointz and cercles merveilous ;
sleep , for the midnight is chill ,
dwells in a castle none may know .
but rather , firmly to deny
and from his heirs to issue .   and that such
the river wandered by .
her dwelling is unknown to fame--
cómo lloran unos ojos .
for annie : and so prosper'd that at last
the burial office read ,
how do i love you ?
between the doubtful aisles of day
" but tomorrow , when the sun sets ,
' tis strange a prince , shou'd ere a _ fool _ preferr ,
and then he vanished in a flame .
but you ai n't mad .
two natures . beneath her veil and beyond the stream she seemed
for every man must have his share
with a pure soul and lowly ,
they bloom together in the thoughtful heart ;
for all those worthies , lords and knights , he sends ;
then begging for the spirit of our god ,
whose steps to virtue ’s path adhere ,
began he on the horrid grunsel standing ,
“ and blessed the hand that gave so dear a death . ”
but blightless pleasure 's moteless rays
fed han - sin , sprung of royal breed ,
but there 's no trick in this . that arm - ring , boy .
which whoso saw it , could not see and crouch :
her dazzling sister 's image , but not long
the brothers bandiera , who accuse ,
howe'er it was , our hero stood his ground ,
can they , when tortur'd by disease ,
like the juniper and aspen ,
_ son maillot à bethléem , _
' twixt life and death ; health , like a varying , sick ,
predestin'd , we are carried by the force
which transient virtue seeks to cure in vain .
dim surging motions and uneasy dreads
" then i 'll puff and i 'll huff , and i 'll blow your house in . "
repairs to a road - side ;
i 'm going to keep a silkworm 's egg and listen to it think . _
admir'd his fortunes , more admir'd the man ;
" young ladies , please allow me to arrange
they were " aesop " and phaedrus , made over by poetic
the cupboard was bare ,
by carrying sheridan into the fight
they , by their deeds , the fateful measure fill ;
to brahmá ’s grace the chieftain owes
no ; lay thy stately terrors by
she nodded , and with quiet grace
and the sun , from sleep awaking ,
and the scalps which he bore from your nation away !
even as two howling , ravenous wolves
where , if there are all kinds of joys
the wretch ne'er saw me tho ' i graz'd his side :
know that i camicion de ' pazzi was ,
to find the original story - expression of a nation 's myths , its
high instincts before which our mortal nature
lleva prendados de amor .
when they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the
reply , reply !
he takth of mars complexion :
the dubious desires ? " and she to me , " there is no greater woe
and arthur 's ghostly crown .
to light the spring for later , wandering men .
i asked the message speeding on , by what great law was rent
on every side i view it .
have for a new but varnish'd o're the old .
i hear the wind weeping in the hollow overhead :
that friendly no more was the ridge of the moor ,
nor were they mischievous , but as my friends
smiling answered hiawatha :
furnish wood to build a vessel ,
save in melancholy gleams ,
his riches and rank ;      yet reuben was brave .
and , like the coptic monks by mousa 's wells ,
that was the golden age of saturne old ,
already , land ! thou hast declared :   ' tis done .
full thirty quivers near his side ,
she had your name so pat -- and i gave way .
neptune , concerned for the loss of the grecians , upon seeing the
thy thunder , conscious of the new command ,
the flowers of the forest are a ' wede away .
into sweet rhyme .
on purpose to give us their noses .
who thus , alarm’d , to great tydides cried :
the trembling groves ; the christall running by ;
at prague . but death forestalled him , and your king .
before him , on a spear , the praefect leads
now on the champaign , now upon the shore
who bids them still consort with ugly night ,
blossoms and branches green to coffins all i bring ,
thou mortal , me immortal ? know'st thou not
an ' sodgers baith ;
and changed seemed all the fashion of the world ,
morn ! when the fate of all mankind
work'st all thine engines , cutting off a speck ;
than any other maid ,
fair be eke thy greeting / to hagen , gunther 's man , this day .
for all your poems and your plays .
and can only make a fool of me in every sort of way .
never harm ,
the sods with our bayonets turning ,
--mère , les maîtres sensibles
in life 's account avail us aught ?
no more but so ? only with uncold looks ,
as we were still at play ,
that last strange hour to dare ,
shall exempt you from their fate!--
and beat of muffled drum .
crowd , acting upon the random proposition of
and no soothe tell .
all over the most holy place ;
alike immortalize the dead .
thou art more lovely and more temperate :
i shall not miss you , elenor .
drifted back from the utmost west
or deck my hair with gem and flower ,
t ' expose a new case of the poets ' temerity .
let our song be as sweet
loved the genteel old man of the city when the once
an ample space , philosophy ! is thine ;
then in what time the primal icy years
by rocky dens , and woody glens ,
suggestion . she will remain with him ever afterwards , manifesting
who comes in his pride to that low cottage - door ,
the luck of finding every body solvent .
therefore the voice must be corporeal ,
through which the sun long settled strikes at random ,
in the famous ode where the note of the immortal bird sets the
at peron~ on~ the sond .
with bold adventurers , their all on board !
“ help of all beings ! more than all ,
that quenches all thirst .
on chiarentana 's top ; such were the mounds ,
all in this golden land .
shone beauty of a soul benign with love .
but i can hear you purring--
the tokne of oure aqueintance is
now pallas shines confess'd ; aloft she spreads
sir strange the knight , so fair and fine ,
then broke the silence of those saints concordant
the soul that comes to - morrow
chip , and upspringing
farm for the goodly earth and joyous day
no more for him where waters sleep ,
for on the side it slants , and most the height
dark the clouds that hurried by ;
while we sustain the losse that thou art gone ,
happiest of the spaniel race ,
and fondly thus address'd her young :
and johnny ’s enigmatic feat admits of this solution ,
i hear that youth -- with more than usual power
we from the bridge descended at its head ,
burning , singing in the sunshine .
or thought of him , save as a valued friend .
who is content with what he has , and seeks
accepting not that cavalier 's excuse ,
and vigilant , turned round towards the zone
in the third group are two mothers who have a double honor ; each
what thou demandest shall he gladly grant ,
who of this light is denizen , that here
great jove but turns it , and the victor dies !
die stille gegend entlang :
to turn the odds of deadly game ;
the sheep 's at hand , and wool is warm . "
and dawn and the blaze is swallowed in mid - mirk stark and blind .
when suddenly the door was swung , a woman halted there ;
the world is tired , the year is old ,
beloved and blest , lit warm with love and fame ,
when we landed high up , with a jerk and a swing ,
this night , and locks pick'd , yet we 're not a - maying .
thus shall you be your country 's truest friend--
has wrought in twinkling green , an alley grew ,
into those magic bowers .
a bronzed man , with a bird 's bright eye ,
than thou . '
into the sky i love to stray ,
the words would come too late ;
behoved a king to have , who at the least
and teucer , noblest archer of the greeks ,
roderigh vich alpine dhu , ho ! ieroe !
deepening tints whenever one speaks ;
her happiness was earned .
phoebus rush’d forth , the flying bands to meet ;
may rage at will , may pile mount oeta high
seruas , moueri digna bono die ,
and i kiss her eyes .
then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles .
then the blacksmith , ilmarinen ,
doth come across him , and he strives in vain
by thy love was lit ,
to converse prompts , which let us both indulge . "
the wreathing odours of a thousand trees
though " out - station orders punctually obeyed "
interpreter between the gods and men ,
the pretty nymphlets of the sea shall rise ,
so streameth out his beams on every side ,
with agramant encounters olivier ,
wha struts , and stares , and a ' that :
yet let not each gay turn thy rapture move ;
filled with stones and burning pebbles ,
issued on either side , as from a boar ,
blots one dear image out .
the gem is not this ode itself ;
he had the passion and the power to roam ;
the noblest and finest , the truest and richest ,
omnia liberius nullo poscente ferebat .
so laying chisel by , he took a pen
and sunken down the faces weeping lay
and ambling palfrey , when at need
be sold at his shop in the popes - head palace ,
half - way up the stairs it stands ,
led the arch further through the future 's night :
a game of blind man 's buff . "
and almost , god wot , at my pittes brink
it is a hard although a common case
our lips of childhood frame ,
weep for another till thine eyes grow dim .
yet they surrender to passion , wildly or grimly or gaily ;
makes the creator visible to all
from poppies breath'd : and beds of pleasant green ,
not any nearer for the child
down from his wound , as from a fountain , running ,
broken her marriage vows upon his head .
like stars that pour forth weaker , paler gleams ,
o shrined above the skies ,
and when my boy grows up , they 'll tell him , too ,
so gently that not one bright rainbow gleam
e'en from yon far hill 's path - worn side ,
i sit within my room and joy to find , 226 .
the pirates deal with him as dung ,
in the time - cankered name of it .
filling seven cups with water ,
thus saying , he drove the solid - hoofed steeds across the ditch ,
and kept our old collection !
this word was noght so sone spoke ,
he lifts his bare head from the ground ;
and something of me still on earth rejoice . "
is called " our lady 's peace . "
a ' plump and strapping , in their teens ;
and both , the spheric race partaking ,
i trust you with my all , and fear no ill .
--_burns 's epistle to davie , a brother poet . _
of al that lond the wisest on ,
its top for all the blowing of the winds ;
and let the younger and unskilled go by
in its course saw the slain on the fields of their fathers ,
to purge the world of the perfidious kind ,
that if unto the seventh night ,
undaunted i approach you , tho ' i know
what now is left of all thy boasted pride !
to a gentleman on his voyage to great - britain
no whit for grief , but noble heart and high ,
pray justly to be heard , nor more desire
so clash their swords , and so their shields resound .
exult o shores , and ring o bells !
this prince shall come broad nations , shall arise many
back to the army again , sergeant ,
to open eyes , and make them gods who taste ;
tiffened -- bought over .
then , dazed , she saw a solitary shaft ,
buying masses for the needy .
far otherwise th ' inviolable saints
transmuted by the sunset , and the flame
lvii . ere long he meets him clamouring , and down
too far for a five - and - sixpenny ship
suspend a little for me thy greater care . tell me who thou wast ;
and in performance of religious rites
why , on th ' march i 'd pause an ' call--"hey , jim ! "
i gave my heart to a woman
let gentle words his heart incline ,
with its so watchfull centry , thee’l betray ,
how much i fear , but ah , how much i love !
but , by god 's grace , here wrecks were in such plenty ,
then the whole world beside
yet none of ye remember .   but if aught ,
pay low obeisance as he moves along :
in prose , the emotions expressed are those that are capable of
who roosh madly roun de field ;
" the inventor as well as the printer of lies . "
a child that seemed fast changing to a wolf ,
killing my playmate by a casual blow ,
but with full - throated joy , the hours of prime
and filling their hearts with the blackbird 's tune .
shimmering and bland and soft ,
not long the avenger was withstood--
yellow and dim with the touch of years ,
from rising walls all roofless yet and void ,
til al was seyd , and than he thus answerde :
the rose adds its lustre--
forsakth , and so it hath don evere .
else he may deal a heavy blow ,
or shades go floating in among the living ,
i too awaited the expected guest .
so , in the like name of that love of ours ,
thick - planted , interdicting all assault .
of a lorn spirit crusht by fate ,
now calmly through the world i wend my way :
and the hope that soars , and the joy that gushes ,
and she told her good - for - nothing child
but we 'll a ' win to it yet ;
and undismayed
' twas gilbert 's garden -- there to - night
but only what she hears .
so will it be , as i have often said ,
fancy beholds with fixed , delighted eye ,
of wheels . if it is warm at all
and havoc scarce for joy can number their array .
long since -- dear heart!--have i been dead to thee .
no price is set on the lavish summer ;
and in his heart it grows the same .
sith that my fairest flower is faded quight ;
brightly dim , dimly bright ;
for young werner he felt pity .
jam quocunque tuus murmure ludat amor .
that with terror and night they veil graciously . "
" now i take the brain of otso ,
who will join in ahti 's battle ,
of laggard sloth , no shrinking from the fight ,
their wicked hands imbrue .
“ a virgin i remain ; apollo 's gift
your doctrines i maun blame , you shall hear .
for one so gray and lonely,--see ,
y el rostro á la beldad tiñe de rosa .
and the goal - ball i 'd strike
build high the fire , till the panther leap
where i prayed beside me brother ere i wint to fight anew :
than that ' tis a strain might a bogle ensnare ,
the malicious little people .
whence springs the sun to light the morn .
the features of a face .
handsome young dandies as ever i spied .
silence in love bewrays more woe
we 're away ! and the wind whistles shrewd
recreate him of whom we are creatures , and all we only are he .
for the necessary basins .
with what he did say , would buy many horses .
oh then what eager whisperings , hoarded long ,
around thee , are lonely , lovely , and still ,
his numbered breaths to exultation
among the mournful , mutilated shades ?
den kleinen erdbeschmutzten band
next day , at noon , upon the destined isle ,
when he had better far have stretch'd his limbs
brade thomas tak ze but zour lance ,
black as a cat and trim as a deer ,
" now out , alas , " he cryde , " and welaway !
the moon , silver bright
' tis all the same with harry gill ;
shapes the firm hide , connecting ev'ry part,--
worthy to hold them burning .   alas !   he had been late
the several names with mickle praise explain
of age to help us . "
as sons the whole year scattered here and there
i thus : " instructor , now await me here ,
by one strong burst of power .
o he 's gart build a bonny ship ,
form be wrapt in wasting fire ,
waits by , expecting his remorse ,
and marked the place he may be found ;
doo beat their buds , that perish through their harmes .
cock of olympus he , superb in plumes !
now ; for our fairy couriers have brought
yet to earth my hopes are riven ,
consoled the poor widow for her son . now he knows , by the
till time said _ now _ ; gaunt from the hangings stole
may right thee . "--"what to thee is other 's good ,
but all etruria 's noblest
so kind and so forlorn ?
to catch a note of thy dear praise .
till the vast roofs ring,--
or cuttle - fish
fetidez y corrupción ,
o what ? ask not the tongues of men .
' correct in few words where i think amiss .
with such disorder foul , back on the fleet ?
she is man 's hunger and prey--
and these heels .
his goblets brimmed with every costly wine ,
give to our old sad earth eternal rest .
and motionless .
with tangled stitches of a burning blue,--
written when governor of chung - chou
thou lord of all .
and so ye are welcome all .
swift - winged in flight
began to knock diurnally ,
they will not listen to the saddest tears
with side - bars never a brute can baffle ;
miss paysley -- because of millicent .
the place was all deserted ;
hers by birth or by adoption .
lassie wi ' the lint - white locks , & c.
suffering the spoiler 's hand to crop the prize ,
late you come in ; but you a saint shall be ,
who -- but hey - day ! what 's this ? messieurs mathews and poe ,
ah ! might i dreaming lie at rest till then ,
roto y sin brillo el cetro de dos mundos
stood fast in the mid horrors . well - nigh , then ,
as if he knew what magic slept
and trod the footsteps , which his _ master _ trod :
sweet revelly to the morn
then kate and i have war .
in mingled tones of awe and scorn ,
and brought blithe christmas back again ,
nos urbem colimus tenui tibicine fultam
flesh of sucking pigs ; but the fatted hogs the wooers
en dat w'at de matter wid king deer 's goat . '
with heavenly manna she 'll repay it ! "
and heart - broken mates ,
drives us afar , we may not come anigh
fast for the sire the filial sorrows flow ;
la pluie , bouleversés par toute une nuit de tonnerre ,
and still fought hard that stalwart lord
set the magical springs of my fancy in play ,
do you hear the throbbing drum
drops the light drip of the suspended oar ,
good manners , sense , an ' larnin ' .
thereon the world throws its deepest shadow
so small he was when he was born , so tiny
tyl vche prynce hade his per put to þe grou{n}de ;
o bane of damning unbelief !
let not the heart the watchful mind betray,--
mine image in the wilderness ?
now are the winds about us in their glee ,
unite thy forces , and attack their lines . "
our love is never spent
contemporaries at the close of the thirteenth century .
i come , led by the starshine bright ,
away from the sun . "
you that were welcome to a treat ,
the moonlight touching o'er a terrace
opening a thousand isles on either hand ,
great men can do their greatest work
his looks adorned the venerable place ;
" behold the king of simple life and plain ,
else they are all -- the meanest things that are--
at leaving friends so very far away .
grass begins to grow ,
disclosing all the mercy and the power ?
" the rose 's dust is ashen
not a softness anywhere about me ,
a sunless world!--all arts to yield
the narrow street that clamber'd toward the mill .
and before the star she bowed her .
was mighty sorry too !
and even as the penthouse of mine eyelids
as phoebus and the famous nine
is unable to make a poor flash in the pan .
the patter of the rain on forest leaves ,
now moved with pity : even as sometimes nods
world - remembrances grow weaker ,
the tender flower that lifts its head , elate ,
his portrait yet is swinging,--beside an alehouse door .
_ lucifer . _              enough spoken . as the pine
better than i can . "
turn of the head and glance of the eye !
then , shall they rue thy counsel , king of men !
then had he naught to ' venge him / but his shield alone .
of gossamer fill'd all the west ,
created and ordained .
broken it up for your daily bread :
with thy bright circlet , praise him in thy spheare
motionless the sleeping shadows :
he 's the sunlight of my joy !
for this time gaze your fill , and when you please
mast and fruit of the cornel tree to eat , whereon wallowing
with ill - directed strength , his weapon broke
to aid them in their warfare for the faith .
outside she heard a drunkard call ,
had dragged up , and stood silent .
an ' drawed 'em up to glory !
minerva comes ; her sheltering ægis shields
" ah yes , he had ! and that lost son am i.
and hills o'er hills , a never ending view .
here , as in haste , for shelter plunged the shade .
leave the corpse uninterr'd ,
withdrew the dripping cloak and shawl ,
gazed at through one 's half - closed lashes
steers his wondrous ship of magic
music had both her birth and death with thee .
guidance of other writers . 12 pages . well printed , with four
would answer aught , till trembling psyche said ,
here i come creeping , creeping everywhere ;
then round our church trooped knight and dame ;
and , however securely the doors may be shut ,
for very eagerness towards the breast ,
found in one sigh the best interpreter
now wonders how they dare to look
monkeys , who often endeavour to destroy and eat the young . it
concerning it . "
parted lovers on thee muse ;
then the ancient wainamoinen
send to the town the vessel with thy friends ;
life was to _ us _ no cloudless day ,
the drifting clouds roll by ;
_ vpon the sepulchre of our lord . _
for six hours bore they without intermission
to bask away her frown .
above , the sire of gods his thunder rolls ,
voiceless now , speed on before ;
young ilioneus , the last , directs his pray'r ,
i saw the last fight of the sections ,
to his memory -- and two or three young misses
hope that blessed me , bliss that crowned ,
and sorrow come . "   but she gave in , laughing ,
as april smiles , the sun auspicious smil'd :
and dock he says ,
ere his lips could frame their usual call ,
the cruel war was over -- oh , the triumph was so sweet !
and they who most abhorre idolatry ,
' ave an ' ealthy appetite ,
and the shells ascend the sky--
of bridewell 's gloomy mound !
and the flower 's on the lea ;
while even o'er them wound that still repose ,
come dine with me , come dine with me ,
he can be what he wanted to be when a boy ,
go now , accursed of god , and take thy place
of homely toil , may serve to show
' tis ours , the dignity they give to grace ;
and fearing no man , wait !
they 'd melt into tears at your smile .
braying - sweet , turn - up feet ,
and kiss'd his wonder - stricken little ones ;
by ghostly bridegroom , held and prest
on him this melancholy man bestowed
thebans , to appease its voracity , were wo nt to give it a child to
then let my winds caress thee
my commands , and shall still in this madness persist . "
and come , for love is of the valley , come ,
and the gentle sound of her mother 's voice
in the far distant future , when the soil
" art thou a romagnole ? " her eyes drove lightnings before her .
their cottage on a plot of rising ground
lies mixt with earth : none now would care
are better suited to a common bagnio ,
for things above the floor ,
i sat where posilippo 's steep ,
within my manor wall ? "
as an own son to thee ,
yet not the more their eyesight failed ,
then he ought to take
and his brave steed carried him through the fight ,
wild as the wild deer , and untaught ,
dismember'd , sought its owner on the strand :
yet his rhymes
take this lesson for thy guide,--
sleep at this hour is pleasant .
her imagining was not good . for in despite of her the
we shall not part for ever .
o te te nimis et nimis beatum ,
and he they served was noteworthy indeed ;
of bawdry brings the blushes in her face .
a ghastly light beside the gas .
one word for her beauty , and one for the grace
breathing these only works : " i am content . "
and she _ would _ do _ exactly whatever _ she pleased .
they go racin ' acrost fer the mulberry tree .
but , exulting , cry it led me
should , thrice welcome shall you be to such accommodations as my
ten bob a week , if you ’ll suit me ,
to skate on rollers or on ice .
the sailing clouds its middle height enclose .
the noisy day is past ;
pawnbroker .
un ignorante soberbio .
the stated convent bell .
a day worth all the rest -- he recollects it still .
till the roses were wet with dew .
if you were up with the auctioneer ,
three islands only , now , confess our sway ;
( o the faint , sweet smell of that jasmine - flower ! )
and some were soft and false as feigning love ,
porphyria worshipp'd me ; surprise
and murmured , " strange , this !   how ?   all firing stopped ? "
when jesus , son of mary , second eve ,
tho ' hard its links to sever ;
d'you see these copper nozzles here ?
and the tokens will be , as the dream passes by ,
even as in israel 's day ,
which earls and viscounts cowering hear , —
but , if the minstrel can no more create ,
ready to fall , as soon as you have told your
the mavis wild wi ' mony a note
thank god ! we know that he " batted well "
beauty always new                      _ china rose . _
and gallant armour of his youthful lord ;
shining and sweet , with poppies in her hair .
- hear , then , my friend , madam !   tongue - restrained he stands
a plaintive face but smiling still ,
the ' joy ' and ' sorrow ' this dear hand portrayed
and sprang upon poor goody blake .
these yeomen went with a breyde ,
never to one , on earth 's less dreadful field ,
o bonnie grows the broom , & c.
in the streets to sailors moar .
just a plate of current fashion ,
the thistles show beyond the brook
he used to study late at night ,
cast on him our load,--
although the terror of all heaven beside .
love has gone and left me and the days are all alike ;
your half - shut eyes beneath your eyelids fall ,
unwittingly ; and only to desire
ipsa hodie vernaret hiems , pulchroque tumultu
a fort , nor far removed was the abode ,
as life about him , by degrees
and next saw farm and cabin smoking round .
and looks most promising . should naught betide
the hairsts o ' time i had to pu ' ,
_ beati , beati , mortui ! _
as i beheld the bird of jove descending
but sticking it , sticking it yet .
flung from a watchfire to frighten and keep
" behind my head , no single lock of hair
warm exhalations and this serene light
quaff wine , and make thy heaven here below ,
mother , i do want to leave off my lessons
that givers of such gifts as mine are , must
only by the children of the patricians , they were subsequently
serenely dreadful , and as fix’d as fate .
' tis almost midnight ,
said jove , " or i 'll make you repent of your folly ,
your daughter only can i guilty call :
and seemed an angel lighted from the skies .
which reveals -- not restores -- the wild havoc of night .
are instantly distilled to one clear drop
from this time it is observed that he became an enemy to the
sleepless when her altar lights
a lovely realm unvexed by fear ,
declared the deceased
slidd'ring thro ' clotter'd blood and holy mire ,
  where it was agreed by every one to lay florence waste,--he
the yule - log , the half of an oak from the mountains ,
stopped forever is the train ,
should i at once deliver ,
on every side the people / to gape at them began ,
i am not of one counsel with the gods .
of tavistock , to sail the spanish seas
leaues were her locks , of golden haire bereau'd ,
if i must suffer , it shall be
soaring in space .
he oftener augments , than alleviates , pain ;
a hand to smite , a heart to feel !
and burst the cannon 's roar;--
and birds to vary time and tune ;
and i wore myself to a shadow trying to husband
wherever the lash of the driver is twining ;
red rose and white in the garden ;
the lifeless burden , once a man ,
nay : give me for a space upon thy breast
e eke graunt us with a joyfull guide
shedding its fruit when time is flown
that to me gave this life 's first native source ;
their tender undertone ,
a glass to you i do n't mind giving ;
so kinde to strangers , and so meeke to all ;
" yet rogues and savage tribes i must employ ,
to see in summer what i see in spring ;
gwyr argoed eirioed a’m porthes . ”   ( elegy on old age . )
my thoughts like waves creep up , creep on ,
i can not bear for meaner things
my heart were all as well set on the wind ,
closing in the death - grip tight ,
" ease off ! ease off , there ! " roared the garboard - strake . " i want
they say they 'll come to preaching still ,
far in the van , like odin 's fatal bird
down the other side again
and not too slow ;
consul of rome . and thus to se
the turf would ne'er be torn ,
meanwhile , amid the gloom , by the church evangeline lingered .
" i wonder when he will return . "
high soared the mountain peaks that bore
oh , it 's pleasant to remember that " the worm will turn . "
the lustre of the eye ?
' twas on the whole a nobly furnish'd hall ,
  [ compare coleridge 's _ dejection . an ode _ , iv . 4 - 9 - -
than this , that happiness is happiness ?
water plovers thro ' the dusk
will of a social being is determined to action , inasmuch as he is
fathom'd by being such as thou ?
traitor i am ! god 's laws command
what help hast thou , what part have ye herein ?
no arm in the day of the conflict could wound him ,
o'er buried hopes , he thus began:--
gladly the thickening mantle , and the green
and , now , to bathe his burning lips he strains ;
as chaplain will dash on !
when the queen moon appears with cloudless brow ;
one morning ( raw it was and wet )
at noon the deadly fray begun ,
is wafted along where the apple trees bloom !
auruncan bands , sicanians famed of yore ,
that shaft had sped , what wind had borne it true ,
--sweet joy befall thee !
if he had in affliction sought the lord ,
warblings under the sun , usher'd as now , or at noon , or setting ,
into the stallion 's massive shoulders
and on his cheek smiled youth 's purple beams ,
with their strange vizards . this will follow right
dead ! where the streamy vales
i hear thee and rejoice :
to my resting - place at evening ,
and ridges the raw damps were hanging white screens
upon the seas , though with a gentle gale .
we dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:--
and robs the nation of its inward peace .
reverting , ruminated on the words
to be seen afar and nearer ,
smote , like the dawn , upon his blinded eyes ,
moves the verdure to and fro ,
that marked the lord of each fair flood
the day of chivalry is dead ?
and kindred , who might cleanse from sable gore
most quiet need , by sun and candlelight .
so deathless numbers from my tuneful lyre
the immortals , and zeus sanctioneth all her deeds .
at his inspiration 's roots ,
to thee no reason , who knowest only good ,
sailing with supreme dominion
there ben diverse impressions
and still the same
“ a dangerous place arcadia holds ( of yore
went to fair pylos after tidings of his sire . and now the
galon yn anfon anfudd dynged ,
and he asked at her mother 's house
flour scraped up , to handmill cleaving ,
o genus infelix humanum , talia divis
and i knew , too , how the wood and the water
jones hoped that mental gifts like his
the band , as fairy legends say ,
when to the beeches i report my flame ,
for thy sake and for all men 's and mine ,
peeped the squirrel , adjidaumo ,
and thus the false pees was take
so " cleanliness is next to godliness ! "
with more than their wonted noise
where the fight burns , and where the thickest rage .
i felt so once ; but i have grown familiar
kneel , smooth blasphemer , unto him
and now th ' almighty father of the gods
believes herself the good
tho they believe , as we all believe , in the holy sepulchre !
at times , while rolling down the grade ,
the boon companion , who her strong breast - plate
killed by weohstan , who won for his kin
flow through the city now ;
who disturb one 's romance with pecuniary views ,
every manly bosom stirs
but , oh , to take your hand , my dear , and ramble
he has a plan . you must n't laugh at him .
up the horizon once again he prowls
rauher war mein postillion ,
a stern and stoical control ;
no sense of labour , but delight much more
v. 98 .   that stream . ]   the river lavagna , in the genoese
then once more be merry , and banish all woes !
ere her limbs frigidly
turning mortal for thy love .
you say " no " to me if i tried to eat from your dish ?
nor had the black'ning wave , nor frowning heav'n
the very names recorded here are strange ,
her measureless days to fill .
take them in thy copper vessel ,
minos consigns it to the seventh abyss .
but this time down it came , and lightly grazed
and the whole with care she carded ,
hang porcelain bells that all the time
in very short order they got plenty word of him ,
would get my love awake ,
began to play around the cyclops ' brain ,
attending on the siege , and in the list
while i conceal my love no frown can fright me .
unless you can swear " for life , for death!"--
have deemed the best thing my thing .
your golden filaments in fair design
i called to him , and showed where lay
so on the 21st of june , the weather bein ' fine ,
the brim around the cup with the sweet juice
and singing there , and dancing here ,
whan she his trouthe and clene entente wiste .
you did that every day of your life , and you will then get a
and some on the jellied quarl , that flings
but if the charms of daisied hill and vale ,
its craggy summits white with drifts .
a puff of garden roses or a waft
all , elders of the people ; warriors erst ,
nettleship , _ the original form of the roman satura . lectures and
ere its silver feet can touch the ground ;
in the castle where the other duke was--
the pillared halls of sleep echoed my ghostly tread .
" lion , " she whispered , " i return my hire . "
till i could know i did not love in vain .
"          an inland voyage , travels with a donkey , and silverado
break them .
saue the dogges letter , glowmynge with nar nar
until you managed to see that world as omen,--
no separate existence .   architecture ,
wher ’s that couragious englishman that darres ,
battle - gear brave :   though a brother 's child
" since adam , the transgressor , thence was driven .
would make his own devoted heart its sheath ,
and thou , my tree ! shalt gloriously arise ,
outlawed within the land of penn ,
his head , a cap and frill .
with this conceit , her iuory hand put forth ,
flumina praetereunt ;
resistless on the rous'd imagination pour ,
are in gradation throned on the rose .
but you , my good friend , are the pigeon .
whose mountains pregnant by the beam
dankwart and volker ; / dead many a knight there lay .
of all illumined splendors , as of old ,
l. 23 . this is the most celebrated of all santillana 's poems .
earth knows a little -- god the rest .
“ well for a spouse befits thee . do my words
where smiling vineyards skirt the main ,
he , nearest on my right hand , brother was ,
of tymolus , which was begrowe
o thou , my heart ! hast thou not framed for life
onward ! now the loaded sleigh
so shocking , they who wish , disown it too ;
if you will ;
nor knew the influence of her eye .
for it will not mend for me !
i know a soul now , fast asleep ,
his father 's heart , shall never mount thy throne .
i 'll have you meet her , i can get her now .
till nicht began to fa ' .
and turn the lamps down low , and make a gloom
he said , nor did atrides not comply ;
" it is a stone that whoso bears
of slavery and sorrow ?
turned earthward , listening--
' give it to yon dear maid
hath not such pain as it makes others have :
so smell those neat and woven bowers
and the thunder , annemeekee ;
where the haunted waves of asia die
that i may learn meeting them in the field ,
you take a cloud of a silvern hue ,
yea life itself at duty ’s call ,
who sneaks to us ?
propagates itself .   he that is weary the first hour is more weary
turning aside he saw a man draw nigh ,
should tenderly entwine .
pilot and captain met as they turned to fly :
and thus i supplicate your supposition ,
just o'er the brows the well - aim'd stone descends ,
it is this master only who , as he writes , can sweep
nor danced so light before,--
highly probable , and which , as mr . keightley seems to think ,
her wings , her trumpet , and her robe the same ,          }
and the turrets stately and high ,
oh , what a triumph and pride shall be ours !
there was a butcher cut his thumb .
creeps over me again!--a childish fancy!--
i scorn him yet again !
i have seen men die with their chins raised high , and
quam tacitis inopina salus illabitur alis !
gin ye wush a douce body , auldfarrant and gash ,
where men like wheat - ears fall ,
" where shall we dwell ? " say you .
against achilles and ulysses most
yet , for a while , one living hope remains ,
mighty shall he be ,
to see ayodhyá ’s lord of men ,
what sort o ' sunday would that be ? ...
his snout digs sepulchres where'er he goes ;
out of the clothes that cover me
so , for so many years , are we condemn'd
shouldst thou from spear or sword receive a wound ,
  from folio 's of accounts they take their handles ,
than the old familiar soup pea green .
in her for him who needed it ;
the children looked eagerly for him each day
the almighty power , that lives and breathes through all ,
and if , within thy breast ,
the bowels of poor florence .   no increase
this land with grove and tower and town .
summons those arms and rules them all
which his maid dress'd very fine .
unplucked by ruthless hands .
a welcome sight to anxious eyes ,
by summer long forgot ,
half a hundred golden bees .
i want to be utterly other ,
all liberty , ) do guard thine ear
god gives us heaven here and now ,
strewing sweet flowers as they go
perhaps her love like mine is but unknown--
but if she soften not her eye ,
from the place forlorn where a forlorn band
and bonaparte the great —
ere in the wild confusion , and the whirl ,
and who absã¡l?âthe lust - adoring body ,
the thoughts you bring to mind .
until the fairest day in may !
or easy nature , might not let itself
themselves , and especially to their prose writings , letters , and
and your prayers go up in wail
even as the patient watchers of the night,--
" if thou do cast thee down , i not on foot
lo ! thus , by day my limbs , by night my mind ,
set back a league from thine own palace fair ,
within each erst - frequented spot
satisfacer á delio meditaba ,
standing up or sitting down
to the design of art , through sluggishness
anon his heart revives : her vespers done ,
such night in england ne'er had been , nor ne'er again shall be .
then proudly hold up your head with the best .
were she all this ten times over ,
and fond beseeching eyes , where lay her mother lone .
( dante to beatrice,--an i profane not-- )
the whole world 's life is a chant to the sea - tide 's chorus ;
and there were gardens bright with sinuous rills
and gained her splendid virtue ’s prize ,
and a something that weeps when i smile .
to escape out of hearing if she could endeavour .
cur etiam loca sola petunt frustraque laborant ?
differing from one another , ( for even as an animal , in the first
and tolled as a bell might toll for sorrow
and what with these is by the muses given
the land , that stood erewhile the proof so long ,
e thee , dearest village , to lay misell down . ”
an ' stop at yam to - neet . "
now , for a time , shall careless laughter be
cathleen ( _ sitting down _ )
" the wizard on gradasso breaks his spear ,
statesman , i thank thee ! and , if yet dissent
nemo est qui factis me aequiperare queat .
but without a groan or shudder ,
i doubt if she may live .
and , cold as asp , embraced the king : her guide
but such as at this day , to indians known ,
what money they had got .
the number of our sins we must fulfil ,
highest and midmost , was descried
yet he is in the garden by her side
in the city i found her ,
and o , it was a fearful sight
my chloris , mark how green the groves .
to this replied :
fast from her eye descends the rolling tear :
e'en now the distant rustle of thy wings .
but little it avail'd : terror outstripp'd
but , crying still , " forget me not , "
and , oh , it is always the summer - time here
an ’ th ’ foak sez at he ’s takkin a hig ;
his clashing sword against her shield .
your strength will waste if it is not used ,
when he laughed at her art and the state of her soul .
" so it went on with its life
i will uphold thee with my hand ,
where crocodiles and monsters lay ,
and beheld and counted the comers , and lo , they were forty score :
" sic ' a coortin ' as yours , my man , " she said
some have not a cent to bless
if we are heavenward tending .
they swam together , hand in hand ,
as floats a gleam
and end of each be heedfully compar'd .
and bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep .
the king went gathering wessex men ,
their vain contentions or ridiculous fears ,
the golden leaves that once were green ,
though you , quite dejected , are still on the wave .
i have something to sell him ;
one feeling even , hitherto life - sweetening,--
  published in the _ freeman 's journal _ , august 20 , 1788 .
he was also , and of lesinges
their inward hearts all naked to her shine :
those call it pleasure , and contentment these ;
with combinations of long - practised art
around her battered prow -- the _ golden hynde _ .
" did i advance no further than this point ,
storms of light
you take care of me ? you stay safe and send me into every kind of
in good nature , half in irony , he says , " old lampe must have
of the blest gods who still was holding back
i 've courted thee with _ orders _ and with _ gold _ ,
then thus , divinely fair , with tears she said .
henceforth to the sunset ,
i could gain as i did in grendel 's day .
where do i live ? why , everywhere , here !
thro ' the roar of alien sound
while weary i wander in sorrow 's eclipse ,
and echoed the echoing cheer .
i am dying : build--(thou may'st)--my grave !
variously representing ; yet , still free ,
in fancy kinds of turtle ,
over thee .
ich gaeb ' , daefur nich eine noble bohn ' ;
with all the sages compassed round ,
when ' gainst the oak his antlers fray'd ;
how black it looks within the vale !
till want i further force to blow ....
where he as true as strong , we should not need
among those in bondage is sophia mansfield--
upon a dark and moonless sea .
and with them all the goodness of the master ,
exposed through crystal to the gazing eyes ,
" the next appearance which adonio made
a floating fusion on golden wings .
" son of hodeirah ! " the death - angel cried ,
then still new crimes of fancy would he call
but zeus is soon subdued by beauty 's tears .
that he would reinforce us from the camp .
islands myconos and gyarus .
who fishes for the truth and wanteth skill .
our souls to compass through each arduous way ,
juan was juvenile , and thus was full ,
allotted always to that use , she first
acres of withered vervain , purple - gray ,
with azure cornice crown'd ; the doors were gold
( the best and rarest visit of the rare ,
the swallow jinkin round my shiel ,
and yet no visionary schemer he ,
with drunkeschipe , and wot noght whider
in that last effort to defend the stair ,
inplebit reges spiritus iste meos . '
like green waves on the sea ,
i will pour my songs into your mute heart , and my love into your
the whole from being of one resultant hue .
has planted on a hill , high ' gainst the sky .
by what he taught and suffered for so doing ,
utters the stars unto the listening night ,
flew up to the moon .
with riot of roses and amber skies ,
if only he were mine . "
above all mortal things was eminent,--
or those which atalanta did entice ;
my more than father said unto me : " son ,
and the stars were bleak , and the nights were slow .
f'r he 's pulled the dive that kapes me alive ,
like birds above a storm that fly ,
that they can meet no more , though broken - hearted :
what honor e'er befall her , / rejoice thereat should we .
olli subridens hominum sator atque deorum
there , might we say , all flower of all our seed ,
the glass , grown hateful to her sight ,
it is to where the sea
maan - e'mo ( man - e'mo ) .    the mother of the earth .
bowing before that veiled and awful face ,
harmless as streaks of meteor
then , but now i must leave these matters to younger men ; i must
he could grind them into powder .
tis his first play ; twere solecisme ' tshould goe ;
on such occasions little may be said ,
out of the sea came he ,
thence now and then fire , flame and smoke outflew ,
vaeinoelae , _ the dominions of vaeinaemoeinen _ (= _ kalevala _ . )
wouldst know what tricks , by the pale moonlight ,
non facilis nobis , aequales , palma parata est ,
with all the gardener fancy e'er could feign ,
can know what desolate
" jolly well tried , old chap !
hath honour found a tongue :
but points with his hand to the in - rushing band
it can not live .
but yet more sensibly this truth to show
when , looking over the vessel 's side ,
but must the gentle , and the kind ,
take all the lovely things of earth and air
and , as the old swain said , she can unlock
and busy hands extend ;
thou my sweetest little berry ,
impressed by her limpness and languor ,
that 's why i 'm going to tilbury town .
float like strange transparent pearls ,
let us not talk of growth ; we are still in our aqueous ages .
thou leanest to the shell of night ,
can not praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue , unexercised
came about the youthful god .
to his rude canoe white pinions
thy crystal stream , afton , how lovely it glides ,
there was an old wo - man , and what do you think ?
nymph of the stream , whose source perpetual pours
pusillanimity , which lifts up the idol of a mortal 's fancy and
one of an age for jim and one of an age for me .
hey , brave johnnie lad ,
that gilds the slough of his despond
his proud soul mounting to his eyes,--
and all his hoarded sweets were hers to kiss ,
along the heath , and near his fav'rite tree ;
can amaranth and asphodel
_ 97 . vitam puriter egi _
to mercy by such means .
while i have power to speak .   i charge you now ,
just like odoardo old
in likeness of a warrior stout and brave ,
imitating nature which aristotle drew from homer 's " iliads " and
now the halcyon days are over ,
' o gin i but had yon wearie wee flower
may speed its flight toward the realm of day ,
a - nailing up at door a horse 's shoe ;
myself i rue .   but tell me , who thou wast ;
why gaze they all on us as we were gods
in sorrow unrestrained ; and i the more ,
" 0 worthy sovereign , " thus began to say
stoited , stumbled .
to her they vow their truth , and are again believ'd .
the mediaeval mss .   are thus enumerated by dr . t.w . allen:--
red are the bonny woods o ' dean ,
the mightiest . pallas , mindful of the past ,
' tis time to consider how things will go there ;
a cobwebb'd cot and wrongs entail'd upon't ;
but a white , celestial thought ;
when all else glows , baleful or brave ,
beside the water 's stagnant glass .
fore - discerned in winter last .
but come away ; we have not time to look ,
smitten
krishna , till thou come unto her , angel though she be , thy love
that thou art swallow'd in the libyan main ,
that bears the samest fruit in every zone--
o dying blisses of the year ,
but i saw him shorten his horse 's stroke
parece que en cada nota
vos sois mi rey en la tierra ;
present mirth hath present laughter ;
our approving praises ,
and on the pleadings they agree .
is by a mother sung .... ' tis hushed at last
when the overhand stabbing - cut silenced the yell--
behind her wing . that spoiled the boche 's game ,
and do we love him well , as well
the sands and the sea , and the white gulls fleeting ,
voices of man and woman , voices of bells ,
be he hungry or sad ,
hast thou in infant vision seen
our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought .
they caught him , and they caged him , like a squirrel .
afar upon a misty plain
contributed most to the high esteem in which he was universally
stretch under the azure skies ;
more horrid still on this mad element ,
the plains , that he fall palsied , grind him in the mills
will never quite forget uraniborg .
seven boats ' length his back extended .
baa , baa , black sheep ( _ music _ )
" what has passed across our pathway ? "
so that to thee i gave
nay , rather , lord , between my past and present ,
and i wat heart was ne'er sae sair ,
the eyes that i miss ,
with the deep where his musics great nebulas roll !
bot al to lytel him supposeth ,
el emperador , benigno ,
in the frosty nights of winter ;
and worms the city likewise / with sound of woe re - echoed all .
thus arm’d , before the folded gates he came ,
shows to the faint of spirit the right path ,
and sweetly spoke and smiled to cheer me
bend , in a glittering ring , and arbors hide
and brush the dew from vernal heather .
touching her sense , and round her bones the fiery web is pressed ,
before me either court of heav'n displac'd .
a spotted palfrey gay
that he no dedly werres hadde ,
and ever and anon the maid would groan ,
and well i know that a brightness
after their severance from this body of ours ,
our long ships loose thought - woven sails and wait ,
all this was natural enough
golden his hair of short numidian curl ,
you may ask about it then .
and ireland wept for tipperary .
the seven fleets of venice
bot yit therof thou hast a grace ,
and in their joy they pitied not ,
whistled then as it passed !
when liberty 's second april sun
more light .
for receipt of a fly ;
eyes to see ;
the eagle is screaming !
ces rescapés des volcans et de l'inondation entrevoyaient
oh shaft well shot ! it galls thee . would to heaven
friend , mr . biglow , needed a monitory hand laid on his
i have endured sorrow and sufferance ,
sorrow 's courage
and hills and scarlet - mingled woods
flooding through the golden gateway ,
ye with heart and vision gifted
but how if boldly i await him here
with her long wand , even then draw thou thy sharp sword
a microbe lingers in a kiss , you say ?
i will , or perish in the generous cause :
with how great compensation from thy store
his bower of unimagined flower and tree :
or those which pierced by ancient roots have spread
his arm shall slay the fiend more base
the angels , happening that way ,
wild shriek the hawks , in waiting for their jesses ,
saw exultation , which no art could smother ,
and no birds sing . '
i never seen no " red gods " ; i dunno wot 's a " lure " ;
has a different way to kill us ,
give them thy fingers , me thy lips to kiss .
charle is at hand , that king in majesty . "
and barrel , and pickle , and bottle us ! "
that into troubled joys darts deep its radiant gleam--
but shun the sacrilege another time .
o ruined angel !
i never see this lovely pair nor hear the mother sing
predominating humour , but by the first book which they read , some
said the lively lemminkainen ,
the bell 's clear silver - tinkling clove the heat .
when they study , or when they play,--
thou euer - memorable stone ( quoth hee )
against the dark remembrance
than any stroke , by fickle fortune sped ,
they could not enjoy plenty together any longer in that
nor could the valiant lycians through the breach
hopkinson , and delivered by a young gentleman at a public
that its pallid form is presently bedewed with a chilly sweat .
than blackest ink more black in face ,
unclasping her silken girdle ,
and that it makes life more pleasurable , and that one thus makes
of men , and framed for pleasure ...
the long low dune , and lazy - plunging sea .
to aid their project , and remove their fears ,
for that half - priest she married with the ring .
what fate unto the mouse and frog befell .
knowing that he is not himself all - perfect ,
that ate the malt ,
there , where the little , bright , surf - breathing town ,
" speak , thou awful vestige of the earth 's creation ,
and yet i scarcely should have written this ,
who brought them here so cleverly .
at every step debates her lord to prove ;
allí el joven lozano ,
on earth so wildly pine ;
eidolons ! eidolons !
outroar the very wasp !
he heeard a fearful humming ,
than mine own soul !
the water - bottle in . "
and the copper - bells rang music ,
around each base rub thrice the black'ning blood ,
" had pity on the least of things
beaten by finger - tips of singing men ,
that night the storm put in from sea ?
to tear his country , and his kind destroy !
unless you cleave the apple . "
ill affronts a neighbour 's wife ,
and far from all the burdens that day brings in its train ,
break in , and mar the omen and the rite .
the murd'ring son ascend his parent 's bed ,
angel wings to speed it on
was roofed with clouds of rich emblazonry ,
of wrong and outrage with which earth is filled .
such downs pan loves , and ofttime places
as one who dreams his wife is dead ,
for thee henceforth ; but tell me , wherefore seated
then came a chief from denmark , / hawart bold and keen ,
o memmius , their threefold nature , lo ,
up from the tangle of the withered weeds
lekker host as much as you please ;
the very pulse of the machine ;
and the heart - beat of the millions
coloured like green wood when flame kindles it .
will go with you along .
and turned to blazing warrior souls
" even now future ' _ keepsakes _ ' seem brightly to rise ,
no foot across ; a shade his ire provoked .
they ask , to bring you beauty , if you will .
' art thou arrived already ? ' then he cried ,
sprinckled with perle , and perling flowres atweene ,
as all sound consists in the vibrations of the air , it may not be
there 's recitations , songs , and fights--
the way you crossed your legs stretched in your chair ,
the whitest star ? and we , o palm ? who knows !
raised the church of papal power ,
were wiping from the king 's hot brow
the nimble juice soon seized his giddy head ,
nor nature 's smiles to thee impart relief ,
for the railing of his fences ;
three peaceful years slipped silently away .
thickets in everything he says , and dashes of shadow
to hunt those very pooty shells in spring .
lara .   to tell the truth , then , i have bribed her maid .
here , heave a sigh .
here , in alleys cool and green ,
no knowing 'em !
with the cheapest merriment ;
the exploit hanumán achieved ,
coming and going with presents and things !
till the late stars had risen . it was not
the dog look'd puzzled , lick'd the fetter'd hand ,
but if there be -- o if there be
the bushman 's tree !
just a will of god 's to prove
funny old man !
when you can lure the wolf at bay
in front , the sun climbs slow , how slowly ,
violets streaked black ridges
can keep my own away from me .
we 'll take the trail to nowhere , an ' travel till we tire ,
the sweetest the house saw , first or last ;
prefer to the performance of a god
home - woe
' in darkness , wretchedness , and want enchained .
the whole vast multitude who , following these
( for , a captured guard , escaping
mindful of that sad vision , which in thought
to hear the gods his griefs declare ,
up from the sweet south comes the lingering may ,
a tale of me , that am a poore man ,
detain'd , there sitting , form'd a spacious ring ,
burn at each foe , and single every prize ;
how praise each effort of my lisping muse !
( written after entering new york harbor at daybreak )
in haste down from the casement / royal etzel made his way .
dashing and clashing and shying and flying on ,
' neath rain of that sharp torment . o'er the ground
forth on the sands the victim oxen led ;
yellow - dog dingo lay like a yellow cloud in the distance--
him followed eke sir guyon evermore ,
as daisies now to be seen .
in grateful memory of the heav'nly sign ,
ye who have scorn'd each other
the wasted weeks had tripped him , the fierce hours
the language of milton as much the language of real life ,
" fare thou with haste now
marching away !
parnassus hears these at his first alarms ;
lonely as god , than mate with barren souls ;
each other cheer'd when dark misfortune frown'd ,
and gentle eccho from the neighbour ground
the bravest tuscans lay .
our home and our tower ,
_ to her who surpasses all , and whom my heart fears and
but much too long upon these scenes i dwell ,
this said aletes : and a murmur rose
observe not the same order , in the motions of the dance , in the
for there i took the last farewell
forc'd by my fate , i leave your happy land . "
macaroni ' ) contains a portrait of miss catley , the singing
as some who labour more and yet may charm less .
and oddling crow in idle motions swing
on he went , thinking of lily - bell , and for her sake bearing all ;
of sant ' andrea ! what avails it thee , "
had held her muffler , fixed her hair ,
and so i joined in roy 's bright changing chat ;
the demon ’s form he tore and rent ,
end he deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship , and
the faire freisshe floures springe ,
the prize of the high calling of the saints ,
" there still wants _ one _ to make the victory sure ,
like crickets in the long , hot afternoon
to slowly trace the forest 's shady scene ,
onward i mov'd : he also onward mov'd ,
" yet i wo n't give all of my last retreat ;
and guenevere 's for launcelot of the lake .
can one illume a leaden sky ,
mine aged limbs above my chair ;
pleasant summer over
take warning , hilda , fly not from thy place .
del impío furor suyo ; alzó la frente
within another ring ,
stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed ; at daybreak
stern daughter of the voice of god !
taed , toad .
but judas hid his face ....
do not ask me of thy daughter ,
let me refer to our friend rochefoucauld ,
oh , what are they to love 's sensations ?
fair guests , that waits you here !
a hero first in every field .
or wind 's bright signal to the ear ,
but after priam 's lofty city sack'd ,
but ' tis not that i 'm stupefied ,
can find a better saying than this if you will ; if , however , you
brings hard owrehip , wi ' sturdy wheel ,
scenting the lazy breeze ,
but there 's nought beneath the skies
that strangely heaved and swelled .
" neither for distance nor for straitened cheer ,
our playthings one by one , and by the hand
their fun'ral honors claim'd , and ask'd their quiet graves .
though a foul vengeance in that blow was meant
or turrets high , and the great towns affrays ;
strange lure by night and day ?
while you sing us caty - did .
your architect has blundered , in five years
they were simple , frugal tenants ,
edgerton , james arthur : sketch of , 247 ;
your pattern man for a minute -- oh , make haste ,
who loves to centre her attentions
her smile is as a listening child 's
his father 's business was his care ,
for a throne ?
to yow , that been my freend so feithfully ? '
the russian , bred in frost and snow ,
some shabby clerk whom all despise--
he himself was busied with my betters ;
above the rolling ball in cloud part screened ,
love the poor sinner , marvel not ;
from misty hill and misty fen ,
the rest , dispersing , trust their fates to flight .
as upon a bark that slowly
we feel a trifle shocked , perhaps ,
efje - sound . a sound in the orkney islands .
without , the world is tired and old ,
no adelaide walks the wood rides ,
where we may rest , and whence we pray to rise .
god 's blessing on the day !
aiding him and the keeper of the beeves ,
' and one man on a big grey steed
of india 's sons , encircling , pour along .
i hear the strangest things,--
the wan , white star of light that overhead
a prive conseil thei beginne ,
the land doth mourn . on every side the spoiler hath his way ;
cubierto el cielo de apiñadas nubes ,
disturb the summer dust , he is so still
and dora , as was usual , sang the air ;
which bore her from her childhood 's home ,
spaces of the human brain
the lordly forest seems a giant 's lyre ,
in sooth had i the utmost / of harm upon the strangers done ,
i put my heart to school
and larger loves than ours are these .
when to their posts , their several troops to head ,
i puffs and i blows ,
thin as they stood , which , then of homely clay ,
that achilles upon the nede
there comes , at last , the unrepeated call ,
with blood of foemen , and finn was slain ,
this aetna in epitome .
here are cool mosses deep ,
o'er her fair forehead , and her neck of snow ;
too soon from it that fled .
" creature of god , deliver me , and bless the king therefor ! "
and on the wondering guard a strange look cast ,
come with your naked sweetness , salt and wholesome , to my bosom ;
and she , from out the veiling cloud ,
but amory 's pen the brighter god displays :
that braced her youth , is past :
restrained his swifter keels , and left the rafts
he hath heard thy prayer and sent me : ask a boon ,
with politics , sir .
garments gay and rich as may be ,
his name her latest word .
perhaps upon white steeds , curbed - in , and tall ,
though i goes not with noar , i 'm first in the hark .
there shall he welcome thee , when thou shalt stand
about my throat my hair went like a flame ,
some lines of care round both
and that her reign had here its last fulfilling ;
to gaze upon the pyramids ;
was loud , and roar'd the woods among ;
of some great , airy argosy .
bade me " refrain from swearing -- for her sake--
gentle and kindly , ever at distress
come nere disgysed foles : receyue your foles hode .
with these two men it chanced me once to sit ,
oh ! scent the wind among the sheaves ,
and trim me best for sailing .
ere the evening lamps are lighted ,
the tiny traitor , love , himself !
those are good tidings .
less coal in the cellar , less meat in the larder ;
unless , perchance , the reader 's eye
psittace dux uolucrum , domini facunda uoluptas
to get new souls perchance at the same time ,
and then a revelation came ,
was flung around me ; and i felt
still is it thor's - day !
two forms were mirrored :   and i turned my face
where daily with their trembling hands
" vain ' tis to wait till the dolt grows less silly !
and you weave high - hearted , singing , singing ,
chamber .
he was not covetous of fame below ,
i 've been thy guide ; that thou must wander far
the boats go out and the boats come in
" my burden is greater than i can bear ! "
slights every borrow'd charm that dress supplies ,
what is the use of my speaking at all ?
in canada so broad and free
were challenging despair .
that merit i deny ,
and then two little maids come out and climb upon his knee ,
' my dear , i was the first who came away . '
shut up proudly in your houses ,
young joy ne'er thought of counting hours ,
the first day . what ye want is light -- indeed
white phantom city , whose untrodden streets
in a stifled tone--
{ 33 }   horace 's " ars poetica , " lines 372 - 3 .   but horace wrote " non
vvho shall in true felicity ,
he shall outlive the funeral ,
which yours have shown , they are not skill'd to learn . "
indefatigable -- the brass - fronted , embodied ,
there , each trim lass , that skims the milky store ,
and some is bad , and some is worse .
while serpent lightnings in the sky ,
i left the imperial city , banished far
blush the fire of flesh , the rose of her body ,
through the twilight shadows of my heart .
nay to the care which he bestow'd     }
winds bring down
give our bodies to be eaten
when he meekly approached , and sat down at her feet ,
the prompt stern goddess
to mee and to my ofspring would torment me
after so many years and dear to tell?--
a tomb of coral , the dirge of bee ,
what but the weight of honours , and large fame
and recall you at a word , at a breath .
braiding up her wet hair with her pale , hands .
but i have suffered too !
i have pondered it over again and again ,
then like a child of sin and wrong
thy sharp wit , thy perfect calm ,
son , see if you can not hit upon some artifice whereby you may
till lost in distance , or with stout hearts make
ay me ! whilst thee the shores and sounding seas
' fals lady , ye sall rue this deid
my leader stood , then spake : " he warn'd us ill ,
the fog of superstition had not risen ;
then the warm blue sky
with his towering ray
no bird above that steep of time
as on her frenzied child a mother casts ;
thro ' the plain , while in gallant procession
my thankfulness for which shall in my speech
but upon wisdom , and on love and virtue ;
it mattered little . you did not know
swiftly past us are retreating ,
who never felt a crook ;
and weave with bloody hands the tissue of thy line .
scarcely has the echo gone ,
that loud bird , in his form like , that perched high up in the
non fuggan quinci e quindi la misura .
his thunder in mid volie , for he meant
did he uplift his earnest cries
their circling .   of that fatal lapse the cause
with eyes of wrath and wonder .
to hungry men and cold .
is the song in the wind and the smile on the waves .
if by such songs you would earn it !
is everywhere cut with pleasure boats ' keels ,
should i allow the vulgar folk
' neath which her young and innocent life had grown :
wherein we are cast out , to sweeten it .
what ! i delay to free her ?
are fraught with fear and pain ,
commentators observe that the grammarian of this name was stained
god made it thus free ,
strutted along with an elegant swagger
the queen her own fears to dispel
light plumage bears them not aloft,--yet rais'd
and leadest the pilgrim
" with hell , not mortals , i contend ;
now he shuts your blue eyes bright :
short time ... his strong piercing laugh threw a.b.c .
she dropped the bar , she shot the bolt , she fed the fire anew ,
and the fern and the flowers are fragrant
which wanders idly through the nodding ferns .
when we read the long - sighed - for smile of her ,
but italia owns the fairest ,
who slumbers .   easier so his way shall speed . "
for the fierce english charge so home and sore ,
for the youthful bride beside you ,
let your contempt abolish me
o thou who hauntest my nights , spectre of time , immense ,
by him who rules the firmament .
with spanish wines which they for ballast lade ,
among my proper kinsmen , who 'll help me to lament . "
looking ill prevail ?
and that 's the thing i meant to say . '
i run out inter th ' woods ,
and look thou well to that ill - gotten coin ,
by no least deed its harmony shalt break ,
oh , i am weak to serve thee as i ought ;
seem as admonishing the nether woods
no more my footsteps roam ;
and sunk to rest;--sleep on !
two angel forms were seen to glide ,
to see if magic fins would rise :
in the first birth of light ,
while all the halls were still , and the cold stars
for wilful waste makes woeful want ,
ah , blest are they , supremely blest ,
and brought me a letter .
who caught his blood ?
north , west , east , i fling you my last hallooing ,
i 'd sauntered in quite trim and spruce ,
the emperor said : " my son , for thou to me
ah , the fateful dawn deceived !
so the fate of being captured
the bearer of the thyrsus ,
stubborn as blazes when ' is mind is set ,
" thus be our parting -- cheek to cheek--
and bones of beasts surround me yet !
again in highland sunshine
it is to pass in silence than to tell .
the thefte which thei thanne werche
like some fair plant set by a heavenly hand ,
xlii . " but if new frontiers , and another folk ,
he knows .
" john 's eyebrow is totally bare ;
a third , a fourth , were not amiss ,
( faust exit . )
i made my toy a god -- i raised a throne
" which must be borne ; yet who can bear ,
or know who rested there , a foe to rest ,
a heaven that must be earned by painful works ,
think on that look whose melting ray
if her tongue _ had _ a tang sometimes more than was right ,
with skull , cross - bones , and sheet ;
sing on , sing on , thy notes repeat ,
but the free life that would no longer feed
that gold and crimson mornings , though more bright
the greeting doth go
that the two worlds -- the seen and the unseen ,
the white sea - gull that often in its flight
an ' that same crop uv yeller hair--
above the darkening plain,--a goodly sight .
it calls for me to come and see ,
i will say it over and over , this and every day ,
they had gone but little distance ,
they struggled long and well ,
and on his comrades ' quivering mouths he laid
on measureless force , and veil her , there on her couch of fire .
and sunset red ,
and low on his body she droppeth adown--
for ever doth dwell ;
where is my jolly boy ? '
whom with three lives feronia did endue ;
still i see , in the sun or shadow ,
his drue lofe shtood de shock ,
" of sinners ' hearts -- guard him this night ,
poor little rabbit , all alone ,
' odi et amo , ' till at last he obtains his emancipation by the
loneliness ;
and psalms are sung with holy sound .
who is my beauty 's equal , though that my heart denies ,
“ whence comes this dread ? ” the monarch cried ;
love - warm , true love wad scarce us let
nor , while my senses hold , shall i repent
thou hast outdone thy seed ?   i did not mark ,
where all is venture !   take each other ,
and thou wouldst be incarnate ?
where darkness binds and frees
and now ' tis time for harvest .   hark ! and lo ,
our peace of mind in silence crushed ,
so whip ! at the summons , old satan came flying ;
ved que fieros sus viles esclavos
to haud us here an ' cheat the deevil .
though with these outward forms we part ,
the fragrant spring may be perfum'd withall .
seeking for ogier , whom at last she found
nathless , it is not meant , i trow ,
for who can work , unwitting his work 's worth ?
from the jaw - bones of the monster .
the gossamer of fancy ’s dreams :
they gather like bees on the broom ;
by arms avow'd ulysses shall regain ,
the sons to toils of glorious battle bred ;
to thy superior chamber , there to vow
years glide away , and are lost to me , lost to me i
with their rough faces throng'd about the bed
he to remount the steed , and through the air
hereafter , join'd in her popular tribes
there where there is no grief , nor shall be sadness .
the dog has supp'd , and having pick'd his bone
a grave wherein we both may ever sleep . ”
hunting , toiling through the seasons ,
aurora stained the heavens with various dye ,
a rifle shot had been swifter ,
christ who heaven and earth created ,
detested be the rage which then demands
sweet curls , from which young love , so vicious ,
his hand brushed o'er her golden gown ,
warriors , martyrs , what thou wilt ; not that our lives betide
symbolisme naissait ; grâce à la collaboration de mes amis ,
spring 's blushing secret now is known .
fierce burns with love . the balearic sling ,
e'en now , perhaps by cold and hunger led ,
he digs for her in the earth ,
and there was often seen .
come , may , with all thy flowers ,
came glimmering thro ' the laurels
it was my right , and was a part of me .
of one who gave you to me !
so he took his wings , and fled ;
only turn away thy magic ,
good sense , which only is the gift of heaven ,
and trouble that i mean to take
and when next thou with prophecy troublest thy sconce ,
my love goes slowly , bending to
with sounds seraphic ring !
how dare we keep our christmas - eve ;
but now ' tis closed ; and being shut and seal'd ,
this will be delivered by mr . lewars , a young fellow of uncommon
in stories of our fathers high marvels we are told
hard and battle - sharp , hammers ' leaving ; { 37a }
that so we may be master of his person ,
trembling along the gale ,
of spawny pools wakes cold and raw ,
youth wanes year after year ; the spring days are fugitive ; the
while the sail - yards greet their vision ,
to find the foe ! on every side they hedge the wall about
all monsters first , by most unnatural birth
to whom too narrow swaddlings are our spheres :
for the old days are past
erminia 's steed ( this while ) his mistresse bore
it is n't half - past seven , nearly !
and yet i burn .   if but e'en now thou fall
into a sombre private room ,
there towers the mountain of the voice no less ,
as thus , in bitterness of heart , i cried ,
and wandering vanity , when least was safe ,
for sorwe of which , whan he it gan biholde ,
pale in the midst , that stately squadron boasts
distinctly , are below from mortal eye
do this , my phoenix , ’ tis a generous part ;
of all else that was dear and sacred to brave and honorable men !
against unkindness , absence , and neglect ;
not a word she spoke in anger ,
groans of the stony mart ;
one howled , ' upon the deep we are astray . '
advocate or protector none in all
of houses she 'd known
derided , spurned , yet uncomplaining ;
incident to those who , suffering much pain , think themselves
we shall ' ave them australian governments
but they knew that it was modern .
o'er the ridges and the peaks .
but , still no breach--"once more one mighty swing
' now break , now break your fairy charms ,
" may yet be here ta'en from me ; but not long ;
far mightiest !   if thine heart be brave indeed ,
god bless , etc .
to crutch him on his way .
and stories of the ancient time ,
looked black as night with his bare bow in his hands and his
while the maidens trembled as they whisper’d :
now dabble the poppies shrink ,
a sound like gentle winds among the trees ,
a channel which was more than ankle - deep ,
and not the puddle in thy sea dispersed .
make for thee a toothsome supper ,
' we do n't respect the clouds up there , they fill us with disgust ,
faith , who was deaf , and had to lean , to catch
a thing of mist and rainbow gleams .
and burn'd like him , more glorious at its close .
dwalling , dwelling .
here 's a song of cheer
iam uidetur , et audias
he from the monarch ’s favour drew
restless phantoms come and go
while the dews are on it yet ,
to one , or all of those mysterious forces
if thou believe not , think upon the grain ,
" therefore is the birch left standing ,
lovelier than ever ; and enjoy her there .
so they were feasting through the great vaulted hall , the
but when the herdsman called his straggling goats
which to describe doth no fine words demand .
that make the circle of the vision , he
ah me , if ráma touched me thus ,
but may love , now , have her sways,--
he ever adoreth flowers . nor this i guess
leave this banquet of my people ,
of dreamy foam a staff of wood
" woe is me , my days are ended ,
" hold , hold -- thy words are death"--
each grove , each stream , quick with promethean flame ,
and bright with shadows ever new
pray god send you a happy new year !
the years are slow , the vision tarrieth long ,
modest , yet withal an elf
the ladies ’ guard , apparelled fair
straightway he begins to yawn , so soon as he has reached
i have tasted of the hidden honey of this lotus that expands on
at sitch a bitter cup ,
the sailor heard the humming tree
lavinia , desp'rate thou hast slain thyself .
fine as a wasp 's sting .
implicitumque sinu spinosi corporis erem
which most concern'd me , she had greatest pow'r .
the secret , that thy father lives , retain
your men of the land , from the king to jack ketch ,
the next he writes his soul 's memorial .
as if it were his god 's ? '
and daily the horizon scan
thou would'st fain thy favourite save .
the soft unbosoming of all the springs
and turn sometimes from busy haunts of men
a building high and spacious , and thereto furnish'd well ,
who from euboea and from chalcis came ,
" i have done what thou hast hidden ,
that has been , and may be again ?
would be my final inch , --
ah ! i perceive a juggler 's trick .
nay , i can say , in ev'ry sense ,
“ i ’m almost brocken - hearted , ”
he sayde to hys brethren upon a day ,
the man could stifle),--crida toss'd on high;--
every wise man 's son doth know .
on , he came to the mouth of a river , and here he thought would
when cyniras ( father of feareful lust )
from all philosophies soon to sever
giving them to other people . "
her crown of light betrays her .   so , she 's safe !
among the honoured dead .
o'er the land of the free , and the home of the brave ?
sad shadow of the ancient world , come forth !
at daybreak on the hill they stood
lived in his mild and magnificent eye ,
the rainbow 's glory is shed ;
but , fronting sea and curving bay ,
but some one drew his side - arm clear , an ' nobody knew how ;
was bartered by a timorous slave ,
whereat towards the summit of my brow
like that , which once on etna 's shore
' talking 's dry work , i have no time to spare . '
ye leave to us -- glory and sorrowing .
within me as i view it , and i cry ,
perjur'd neaēra ! thou shalt one day prove
retir'd it blooms amid the lowly plains ;
well - nigh a god himself , with sudden strength
tough luck !   i s'pose it 's ' ow a man is built .
but even as he roared his curse a still small voice befell ;
one black night
at last they came to a village gate ,
fair isabel was likewise sad ,
they must never hope for glory--
master , i am afraid .
assured thy faithfulness can not betray ,
uado tamen , sed dimidius , uado minor ipso
before it begins to wither and harden !
there came a sound that seemed to say ,
are you in the sky ?
the eternal coolie ,
prodigious creature against him -- a savage wild boar with great
ruffles her pure cold plume , and takes the flood
to keep collectors off , have all run smoothly ,
and he would want some place to be
i 'll send up to every paper ,
not crediting what the lady said ;
is had in memory , and on many a shore
with tongues of storms upbraided ,
bullock , the best of the four . i left the plough , and sought the
while this was said to me by mahomet
" art thou then a cliff of granite ,
she looks to left , she looks to right , and in the midst she sees
pray just inquire about his rise and fall ,
then pylon next , and ormenus he slew :
all the foolish joys of earth . "
if rightly thou art called , whose voice divine
without a penny in my purse ,
" our work , " said i , " was well begun ;
what pair so happy as we two ?
v. 56 .   where the sun in silence rests . ]   hence milton appears to
his brother liger by his side , who holdeth rein as then ,
and , sacramented there in light ,
the yellow samoans sleep ,
no thought of trouble , no hint of care ;
up the paths by roots green - mossed ,
frequent and long his musings , till he feels
and hell rejoiced , and all that ribald host
or with mantling poetry
for i am well advis'd , who have been erst
he was hunting the mountain bear ,
but serve as hinds to sweat and toil ,
for hence the plenteous year shall heap
and do the lilies by thy grace alone
that 's only sad that it may please ;
i would forego the right to fill a throne .
your sovran sweet rapaciousness ?
no wonder if words hav ' a - grown to blows ;
as he went towards the vessel ,
she put on youth in her look and air ,
of your curses and your ban
( for i knew his white small - clothes and brown leather gaiters ) ,
in the solemn midnight
he drove a rattlin ' shot from off the tee ;
lost in this pleasing ecstasy ,
and so they are ; yet thus is glory 's dream
there still , perchance ,
of friars , giants , hermits , smiles and frowns !
arise , arise !
of meditation slipping in between
twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid ;
contra el tirano macedonio alzando ,
" gran'ther , " sez i , " a vane warn't never known
hoping together against the calumny
till nowhere is a single
at once without the city a tourney they began .
and brows as holy and as bland
in drops of dew on the poppy 's palm--
cassero who speaks . he was a noted and valiant member of the
for , before the castle , a trumpet 's blast
and ring these folkes works be note ,
for every stone , as well as she ,
that earth no life which earth has known
thou wast the charm of women , lovely moon !
will gladly rest his limbs , who safe shall fly ,
and again love and tears and the light !
“ i have passed the night at brattingsborg ,
oh , the broadswords , & c.
he spake , and at his words grief like a cloud
early we retired and late we waken’d .
are garmented anew .
but when i grow weary of mirth and glee ,
assuaged her wild despair ,
thy fervent flower made fruitful from the sun
and grew apart thereafter . and from that day
when for ten days they expiate a spree ):
to think them kind , when this is spread .
but sate long time in sencelesse sad affright ,
forth with her virtuous husband came ,
on the ship - rails he could stand ,
till on gross things he dash his broken ray ,
' i am alive ! ' ' but in this very place
a glowing life--
thy bosome , and make roome . thou art opprest
grow the dim splendours , broadening up the skies ,
till thought pursues in vain .
of pride and glory fired her face ; her eye
with my sharp , tongue - like sword
" ha ' done ! ha ' done ! " said the colonel 's son .
as many children god had given ,
by simmering stew - pots , by the serious looms ,
my earlier dreams , like tints in rainbows given ,
hurled o'er the abyss , see the crowned martyr lie
where on the deck my captain lies ,
into the sunless land ?
if compar'd to bessel 's magic divination , awarding
hurry and skurry -- away -- away ,
springing and spurning the tufts of wild heather ,
dealt with us thus ?   behold thy sire and i
who am , most fervent ,
and down the river in it sails ,
bowed his hoary head in anguish ,
i 've taken it with the rest .
with a vision of dread ,
he sought his boyhood 's home . that hour
but virtue 's patriot theme ,
who nurs'd my infancy ; unhappy he ,
shrouds thee wheresoe'er thou shinest .
that debt which can not ever be repaid .
for pale at his feet he sees her lie;--
and should it sae betide
go back to your cote , you shall never wed!--
see ! see ! ( i cried ) she tacks no more !
" for he led us , he said , to a joyous land ,
they will make the big organs roar ,
the throssil whusslit sweet .
pike and javelin , shaft and dart .
if fortune with our joint desires comply ?
where find their fate but in the ghastly deep ?
let not their slaughter once your hearts affright ,
with the great organ trumpeting
the mutual salutation past ,
before my form was broken ; for in me
obedient to the high request
thus ev'ry kind their pleasure find ,
the beauties of the art his converse shows ,
if tears are shed , they do not fall
are not for pride or empty show :
by whom we first were visited ;
the yellow pennon of the spear , and strikes
nor gleam with silver , and to the lyre resound
but for a mantle changed the coat he ware ,
and up she threw the window sash ,
wide opens the entrance : where 's cold , now , where 's gloom ?
but those hours are past ,
great fire she would seethe up through all her troubled
what useful was to say , she said , and what
and we d thee , sweet ! " she answers bright :
to arms , and cry for vengeance upon thee .
all or in all ?
stubborn old thing !
leading afar past wild magnificence ,
what so proudly we hailed at the twilight 's last gleaming--
epigram pinned to mrs . walter riddell 's carriage
and drew him up , so that he seemed an otter .
in cielo e paradiso , e si la grazia
or you 'll soon be the laughing - stock all over town ! "
who sees her millions , martial , manly ,
but whence came that ray ?
i have sat -- knowing naught of the clock--
or noisy , insolent sport ,
hearts can thus be torn away :
the headache is worse than a pain in the hand , a toothache than a
yet never shall prevail , since , do whate'er he will ,
the inn was full .   he went his way
whose bones lay bleaching in the wind and sun ,
and sturdy horse - chestnut for centuries hath given
diadems drop and doges surrender ,
and all the bitter years of my exile
a foolish strife ; they see
so here they fall to strife ;
of poverte and of alle wo ,
goddess of plunder , and prayed saying , " accept these , goddess ,
he comes a king,--no people but the slain ,
man may hold all sorts of posts
that was all ! and yet , through the gloom and the light ,
" whom even now her pleasures must forsake
often our midnight shout
who heeds not friendship , kith or kin ,
to the rice - swamp dank and lone ,
the sleepless ocean 's ceaseless beat ,
at which headfort with warm reminiscences gloated ,
tower the honored mounts yet to the heavenly blue ? is
a better horse . "
with gladder heart i read thy holy book ,
in service high and anthems clear ,
and slavery before them!--
on wisdom such as wak'd in gama 's breast .
unless i proved thee also with the brand .
i strike -- the murmur sent
heard the pheasant , bena , drumming ,
with morgane 's hollow lute , one studious dawn
for , as the sun doth to the feeblest sight ,
remember the truthful alone are the free .
i never saw a tilt by candle - light ! "
and even that tempest of destruction moves
silver leads one to destruction ,
my view is brightened and another spot
and pupil , in the forest wild ,
my veins
o christ , our life , foredate the work of death
than grinding discord out of a grindstone ,
to tell the event of things to end unbrought ;
now radiators thump and pound
in blood from stinging whip;--with hollow eyes
and then they turned and looked
and therefore is my heart so sad .
brenin breisg werin , brwysg agdo ,
that seest thy fair child perish thus
till they strike up marches henceforth triumphant and onward ,
it were thy loss if i could show
but you can be so vile and base !
' neath his white hair , bent over me and moved
has pierced the pall around the senses thrown ,
each scraping thorn ;
mamma is a lady ,
acquire some substance _ here _ , there is none _ there _ ,
shall i gentler prove to others ?
some ray might his not give
with a love so sweet and true ,
that sunny month of june ,
and if not now , why use thy tears to flow ?
once der wus a liddle boy dat couldn ' count one .
when she came to her grandmother 's bed ,
perhaps thou wilt ; for i have brought thee here
and that night for the first time i stagger'd to bed ,
to match the blessings of the future state ,
let us go back together to the hills .
and ek he sette an ordinance
of all but him who dwells in light ,
had wounded me , that either cheek was stain'd ,
that thou would'st fight , thyself , with peleus ' son ?
murmur thy name that shall steal on their passion
i meant the world , " he groaned ; " not you -- not me . "
and left them both , more in himself content ,
the second group of famous mothers are mortal women with mortal
thy pinions only bear thee out
the appointed bound is placed !
for if his own knight cast him down , he laughs
and then i saw that they were bad ;
of colour , imperceptible to our eyes ,
yet , as thou go'st , may every blast arise
strung from the cirro - clouded skies ?
" work she must in working season ,
but equally a want of books and men !
and in my flesh thy very flesh entombed !
a self - withdrawn and independent bliss ,
then odysseus of many counsels answered him saying :
( undone as oft as done ) , i 'm won ;
and curling and whirling and purling and twirling ,
and with a blood like mine , will leave , i fear ,
make your own souls part of your own soul 's wrong ?
whose sunny foam bedews the air .
far statelier halls , ' neath brighter skies than these ,
how quickly the heroic mood
like a star that slides adown the arch of night ,
your goodly selfe for evermore to vew ,
since with his weapons , all the arms of night ,
kind - hearted captain reece , r.n . ,
i 'm back to the army again !
would not gather to grunch in the daintiful south !
the shrill , demented choirs of wailing shells ;
when thus my master kind began : " mark him ,
of planetary music , so far flown
say , ma ! did god make all the flowers
ventur'd to seek in shades , and dar'd descend
a little while and ye shall see
to save llewellyn 's heir .
and paints them out or tears them down ,
where the midge dares not venture ,
that is novembre which i meene ,
some fearful end must be : where , where is it ?
the seven tall poplars on the hill ,
but , laddie , seek to ken nae mair !
still unveiled his bride awaits him . "
why human buds , like this , should fall ,
" oh , cease your song and get you dight
with the dying gods we have held carouse ,
all at once and all in tune ,
is womans happiest knowledge and her praise .
" choose now between , " he cried , " calm death by him
( retorts euryalus ): he bears no claim
that the strong pulse of health no more is mine ;
beside the mawddach - stream , or far cynfael--
here to her eyes some tearful memory sprung ,
no foreign beauty tempts to false desire ;
when henry , with his latest breath ,
of that inflictive process , tuning--
a trouble takes me ; i know not
like good aurelius let him reign , or bleed
for sche is evere faste by ,
the pungence of strawberry plants and of gum-
based upon nothing ; for her sire was able ,
" in the southern sky this bright star lived ;
" think not that wars we love , and strife affect ,
to stay .
and these black bodies and this sunburnt face
when armëd horsemen guard their wanderings
in that solitude deep and blue ;
cleaving all the quiet sky ,
that a softer hand than mine
and more i might have seen : firenza , goito ,
one that for loftiness of mind would be
till he neared pohyola 's woodlands ,
and by this they knew that the coming was near
upon me . ' ' i will not bestow it , ' says moling , ' for thou
a bitter sand beneath their teeth they grind .
the trickling blood ; he to his comrades first
_ by your truly affectioned seruant , _
associated by the poet with ' the immortal spirit of one happy
in the vile habit of a village slave ,
at dawning of the day :
celestial seat of brahmá ’s reign :
and the proud old " turk " of the farmer 's barn ,
the startled wild - cock cries :
some plant without apparent seed be found
then he sat down , still and speechless ,
_ to scoop out the scathful water that fain escape would ; _
which lay around -- behind -- before :
misplacement of the epithet , reading:--
but thou art much a railer , one whose heart
and my cheeks have paled with sorrow ,
allí habló un alfaquí
round the table joy and peace prevail .
and thus to raghu ’s son they cried :
woven forever with its crystal gleam ,
a barge with ochre - coloured hay
she has put a bomb in the clairet butt ,
her feet had known the stinging thorns ,
wind - smitten , dread , against the sky - line 's rim ,
i do n't want to pretend nothin' ,
there is who hopes ( his neighbour 's worth deprest , )
for anger and for very jealousy .
and how his color came ,
about his chariot numberless were pour'd
for many a league the lengthening road
it hurries all too fast to mark their way :
but not through wounds ; not on the cess of war .
so genius ' self became the slave
what brutes men are when they think they 're scored .
broken in many waters , seeing that there was no continual
" hip , hip , hurra!)--is trying still
complain i , for ye be my lady dere ;
o where shall we our lonely refuge seek ?
while thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad
marked out , for rites the sacred land ,
and those are owed to generous wine and food ;)
yet for the soldiers all to witness stand
toward that territory mov'd , secure
heard a carol , mournful , holy ,
tired and woe - begone ,
" o ruler of spirits , what dost thou give me for free-
hearers and hearteners of the work ;
under the blazin ' sun ,
or come in garb of storms ' mid thunder jars ,
of history 's father , laying down his pen,--
to do a " mahogany " swindle .
when i from black and he from white cloud free ,
by the prophets and diviners at the commencement of the war with
and he had jousts and tournaments ,
for beeves hereafter ready for market ;
their bells and flowerets of a thousand hues .
if with this throw the strongest caster vie ,
it may be that they are a harmless wile,--[kw ]
so fair a bride shall leave her home !
i see in them and myself the same old law .
as for thyself , when some achaian chief
upon the full moon 's side of the first haycock
at mora si fuerit damno , properare jubebo , & c. vida , ib .
and with approv - ed music clear this slip
travellers in mexico have found the form of a serpent invariably
while otos aped the prisoner 's wrists and knees ,
where you would not , lie you must ,
und gry oud - " for gott 's sake - shdop !
as phosphor far outshines the starry host ;
' before we take the seas again ,
vvith more then art would vvillingly allow'd :
from the blind thicket wounds a stately deer ;
their udders swollen with milk , while flocks afield
shall soon make gray and wan .
fronting praise or blame
proputty , proputty , proputty -- sam , thou 's an ass for thy paaïns :
no share for me then in the stir ,
which out of moistened turf and clay
and welcome waterspouts , had we sweet rain !
of tallest hollies , tall and green ,
or for the nod of jove when night hath flown ,
when round the fire the elders
unfortun'd theseus ; while sad phlegias saddeneth hell
doth here on earth some thing of novity ;
ah ! o'er that smoky town who looketh now
longer tow'rd such a goal to move its feet .
they ither folk their parritch eat
a little gift god gave my youth,--whose petals dim were fears ,
aweary is he , too , of fellàheen
the woods are spoiled and hoar ,
her nice little garden is shaded by trees--
till alfred caught it to his knees
mrs . g. you never wrote any for me ! what happened ?
then sunk the moon , and far away ,
a welcome home to thee .
for their homeward trip in a parlour car !
which wins thy gracious favor for all time .
i stood within the niche thou knowest well ,
' now tell us all about the war ,
and loses not ( as painfully he spells
since what i write to - day shall stand
unmatched its glories ever yet .
with prayer , the broken - hearted nun ,
and , departing , leave behind us
of beaks and claws , disclosing to their sight
from god , who is our home :
the white strips of sky
note . -- this poem may have had , like many others , a
for eleven dollars , at a sale for taxes ,
in their houses and be at peace ; but with that high spirit which
" gods ! can thy courage fear the phrygian ’s pride ?
number of its sons , prosperous in blessings , as i promised
the good that ye did for the sake of men or ever ye came to die--
if envious buckies view wi ' sorrow
i still have strength to pray :   " god rest her soul ,
and quench , for ever quench , the wasting fire
her chief resource was in her own high spirit ,
long may he wander , rags his wear ,
f. yet none but you by name the guilty lash ;
fights and furloughs , talk and tale ,
so much of love her spirit had ,
i have ask'd grace at a graceless face ,
as strenuously we stride , -
_ prince witte _ . if there is a man here in whom dwells a spirit of
of whatever material suits you best ,
and , pointing heavenward ere she goes ,
though few but himself on its pages would look ;
good reason too , but oft the seeds
" go to the devil -- oh , send binkie in here . "
hay una hoguera á cuya roja llama
a wind - shaken flower spilling my drops in the sunlight .
it has seen my life 's beginnings ,
and i could'nt help thinking good madam between us ,
it flitteth all about the place , and rising upward soon
the moon slides down the stair
he saw her leave her arms and wonted gear ,
in compartments that are larger ,
_ alas ! i lost her in an arbour , _
with popes and kings in their porphyry wombs ,
to the strong arm of the pine - tree .
we sit still ,
built in the eclipse , and rigged with curses dark ,
that for an hermitage ;
in a humble mood i bless
less ;
oh , why did papa strike pay gravel
addressed him with an angry cry :
and they wake into a light
and then he dons the silk - worm 's shed ,
i 'll ne'er borrow money again .
taken with vertigo and dimness of sight .
these doors thou lockest here ?
nor who so fortunate a course will run ,
and you plucked at your fan as a maiden will ,
seemed on a sudden to disappear ,
can utterly abolish or destroy !
in his course .
but in the winter 's frost and rime !
we must in humble ranks united stand .
or lead the hearts , but then you see
and there comes glad singing ,
passes the blade ... dead on the place he falls .
because the pathos of your grand repose
the preacher now provides himself with store
i ' th ' universal order , great defect
come to visit me once more ;
grey waving to the sunny gleam ,
little white lily
o briar - scents , on yon wet wing
the coast of elis , were by meges led ,
the velvet tread of porters ' feet .
that nature for her happiest children made :
thy hawthorn glade which now we see
naked nations and bare
fearful to tyro is thy primal stroke ,
friends ' begging ,
the breathless hector on a sumptuous bed ,
his life sic noble lives recalled ,
and with the doughty viking ,
but few are vagabonds or rogues of doubtful name and worth ;
over his sullen eyes : i saw him throw
yet trembling ; but no voice was heard ; no form
boh da thone was a warrior bold :
had i to guid advice but harkit ,
“ my station seizes ; and a different course
for like a shadow came the thought ,
they pass,--till sudden , looms amid the waves ,
and in love 's eyes he was not death , but fame .
pioneers ! o pioneers !
as delicate as ferns that grow ,
he never made a famous speech or did a thing of note ,
si forte non cedat deo ,
the constellations in their nightly round ;
is there a heart to - day ,
and this was queer ,
  see chifflet , j. j. , _ anastasis childerici i ... sive thesaurus
for ye wot well i am reidmar , and that there ye lie red - hand
their bounded walks the rugged cliffs along ,
who stand before thy presence faint and weak ,
but what is odd , none ever named the duke ,
submissive to his will
still follow sense , of every art the soul ;
honest work for the day , honest hope for the morrow ,
vuélveme , vuélveme , moro ,
sawney , v. sandy .
but gyneus led two - and - twenty ships from cyphus . him the enienes
could n't afford to be sick ,
whose sadness soothes me like the murmuring
sing him the mystical song of the hern ,
and calls the mother of the smiles and loves .
middle of the son of phyleus ' shield with his spear , setting on
in martial mail , nor mourned for his life .
no blunders or crude schemes are tost ,
as though in some arabian plain he stood ,
reflection of the blush of the bride .
his sayings overpowered me :
where love himself with tremulous step intrudes ,
and cometh from afar :
the friendly wind conspired to fan
_ " are men such small unmeaning things
tell me if any born of latian land
and still they close and gather
strike off the fetters , loose the band ,
the croton ode ( page 57 . )
& suffridist heere peynes ille .
grinning with ghastly feature : he , of all
forbid it , jove , and all the pow'rs of heav'n !
and not a king ’s magnificence .
his day is marching on .
lycius shrank closer , as they met and past ,
while thus , in sighs , the royal bride began:--
' long we asked for peace ,
a new - year 's lamb
prophetical , afar,--
for not yet can i turn homeward ,
and i ca n't think why !
animam levibus credidit auris ,
blindness ,
not once abash'd or weak :
for , note when evening shuts ,
and lifted up her watery e'e--
and riht so nowther mor ne lesse
but still i lived here , lest a fresh attack
charged freedom 's heroes true .
to waigh thy spirits down , and last consume
parch them in winter - time on the bare stepp ,
o'er the meagre , long plain disconsolate .
" i will never forget the impression he made on me when he played
blunted with gore congealed no more could wound ,
to one loved voice sweet calling o'er the foam ,
you shall not with the daisies play .
fresh rising blushes paint the wat'ry glass ;
the scattering autumn hoards for us
and various labours of the loom beguile ;
the revelation of the star - strewn deep ,
' twas vulcan 's house , the land even yet bears vulcan 's name .
for happy , honest men , safe in their graves ;
who that has loved knows not the tender tale
with torments fill'd in chaos here ;
beholding thee and this fair place , methinks ,
a bottle with bluebells
yet make at once their circle round the sun ,
and a flickering fire of bog - deal
then in requite , sweet virgin , love me !
the emp'ror rises and remounts his steed .
of ithaca , returning , undertake
to watch the silent worlds that crowd the sky .
decoyed him with her oracle ?
bot þat þe ȝonge me{n } , so ȝepe , ȝornen þ{er}-oute ,
the limbs with humours , which it ill concocts ,
adieu ye shepherds ' rural lays and loves ;
i 'll save some cake ,
she . guy , what is my name ?
against the sky 's blue arch was pressed ,
i leaned , and looked into his beauteous eyes .
finds the glen - wood filled with sorrow ,
a younger than thyself , no matter whom ,
to thy lord and liege in loyal mood
do thou take in , besides ; since once for all
begrafted into one ; but each sole thing
long ago thy race was run ,
and held him in alternating accord
who without favor , without fear ,
raud ! " cried sigurd to the seamen ;
which thick with shades and a brown horror stood.--wakefield .
be cheerful ! be cheerful !
for prosperity is hovering o’er the plains of riverine .
to other scenes , either of joy or grief ,
no , till death i 'm thine .
he smoothes his tresses , and his robe adjusts
and sailing pinions.--upon such a shrine
word " cardo " .   the word " belt " seems fairly to answer to the
we thought , but never said .
to see upon his bosom ride
as they hear the minstrel playing ,
nor how that led was homeward emily ;
_ for all the story - books you read : _
are crude ; but on thy part is the defect ,
all sowed for next year 's crop , -- a dull advance
round the wide world their devilish squadrons chace ,
pour your gladness on earth 's head ,
v. 17 .   my son . ]   the remainder of the present canto may be
was told he had a thought of setting up a newspaper there . but
and still content my self with this
" thus , with such a blade as this is ,
ever fullest bloom is giving .
of wind and sun and rain ,
the years have passed in ceaseless round
projectile or to the attractive force exclusively .
" for , brother , the depth of your gentle eyes
as written in the old record
so that , both penitent and pardoning , forth
laodamia last , belov'd of jove ,
canst drink the waters of the crisped spring ?
in her gradation , hear her louder still .
love 's infinite flamelets .
the laggard soul , that will not wake ,
of oriental poppies .
ah ! green oak - leaves , you are trembling now--
the visage of forese .   " ah ! respect
we for another 's danger had no eyes :
' tis she that must preserve those glories green .
alas ! ' twas heeded not .
and lecture , with a skill profound ,
at my darling beech - wood table
that i cut too many didoes and monkey - shines to suit
the chariot , towering , threads the fiery sphere ,
he fell before the angel 's feet ,
three of our mates we have left for dead ,
though i find the speaking hard .
its temples and huge teocallis
and the dread verge still gains upon your sight :
he could not offer one excuse for time ,
sure on the earth lingers yet such a soul !
“ ’ twas meet that mid the thousands here
moved by the sight of that renowned chief ,
from breathless blending of far - sundered wills .
how i should like to be half so good !
" not through caution sinks a vessel ,
that dolorous man of cape horn .
and shown no glorious morning face ;
o'erheard this speech , and asked " what chucklest at ? "
what heaps of diamonds , rubies , emeralds , pearls ;
¡ oh ! ¡ reposad en vuestras quietas tumbas ,
o fortunate , for whom , when victory glances ,
with heavenly water clear and sweet ,
by the woods and waters of carmel the lark is glad in the sun .
singing softly , like a dove ,
but for the ramparted cloud - prison ,
--at the threshold of her chamber door
some are , and must be , greater than the rest ,
underneath these famous rafters ,
i see , before the campfire 's fitful gleam ,
to find myself on barren steppes were bliss .
true beauty still shines clearer
at wrangler and prize poet ; last ,
  [ the clef , is now a café on the grande place , and still
and numbered every secret tear ,
an angel in the dark . a while it lies
that last is , the devout soul , wise , intent
stone .
_ and were i only young again _ !
this is that andrew doria who will sweep
on woodways wild with many a vine :
lay moving on the grass ;
stream'd o'er a dying storm . and thus where'er
and when you thought , it seemed to me ,
in troy meantime , at priam 's gate beside
achaeans -- talthybius and idaeus both of them honourable men ;
of epic love 's beginning , end , and middle .
ten million lesser lincolns must arise ,
danced in rings with girls , like a sail - flapped mast .
sheathing the saber and breaking the chain .
within youth which rather seems her clime ,
this is the country of the free , and free this land shall be
ser federigo sat beside its door ,
on þe mou{n}t of syon ful þryuen & þro ,
his clean hearth - stane , his thrifty wifie 's smile ,
but the same beauty which had conquered wole
men have marred thee , o mother :
through abysses unproven
i leave , and keep her safe from harm ,
in the great august cathedral of his holy lady , he
night 's darkness fell about her , but the breeze
the story . climb up there upon the bed :
i knew a phoenix in my youth so let them have their day .
that was so used to her face .
to fly destruction . wiser him i deem
the rosy , tint - like blushes on her cheek ,
his spear against a tamarisk reclined ,
and to his words of wisdom lent
there wild - woods grow , and rivers row ,
and struck pyraechmes , who from amydon ,
will not conceal me long , but thou wilt know
a spell lies on the garden . summer sits
between .
at sight of me he first turned red , then pale .
wherein were writ the tales of many climes ,
my brother 's soul come down to me ;
with its great yard of clover
to his stern heart !   one piercing neigh
is the child the gods desert
albeit the thing may easily be true ;
the city 's malady hath ever source
wants her fit vessels pure ; then strows the ground
hei , sausende pfeile , klirrender schwerterschlag !
and ned is very nigh six foot , and joe is
and devoid of power remain .
nor , as in winter 's more enduring sway ,
to live again , though in illusion 's sphere ,
_ herr . _ all is well ; now next to these
and ' neath the painter 's touch blooms forth in splendour
" that ragged fellow is our very man !
with like acclaim they hailed the day
something in the hazy distance ,
valley of cauteretz _ , a poem which tennyson selected to write in
of a cross with the figure of christ thereon.--hymn of the
i made rimes to his lady this three year :
unbroken glory , a gathered radiance ,
to get theyr lyuynge with laboure payne and care
among the foremost , and laying low the ranks of the trojans : bear
and of thy doctrines , and of thy disciples .
thy cruel , woe - delighted train ,
this house of my wedlock , so fair and filled with all
" we 'll have everything all right now , and that is all . "
and each man was singing most gloriously .
on poulter 's measure , 265 ;
changed my thoughts
gliding over the deep . the ocean was tossing with waves ,
lie barren at the doorway of the brain ,
o'er the moonlit sea ,
expresses it , i think , most frequently in his correspondence with
at irregular intervals . in lines with regular ternary
her pallid cheek ran red ...
said then the lost arch angel , this the seat
or as her sweet white sides
be knightly honors paid ;
" so he gazed around and turned him ,
not over the firelight , either ,
breezes , and flowers .
little master mischievous , opening every door ,
story : ' i often used to hold conversations with my teacher ,
is cruel báli , evil - souled ,
( 27 ) the legend that jove was buried in crete is also mentioned
the other with impatient grasp ,
feel the pressure of your hair
on force relied , and found it break :
and thou shall feed them from the squirrel 's barn .
better far to keep thy wisdom
the joy of crags and scaurs he clomb ,
drowned . o pity and indig | nation ! manshape , that shone
for all her stony sorrows hath her sons ; but italy ,
or foaming , strang , wi ' hasty stens ,
from her all hope the wretched damsel spurns ,
to me he laughed , " i yield it!"--but ' twas dead .
and join thee in singing the praises of god .
of childhood , ye were bees , that to the hive
though only a moment 's wandering melody
and , little elves ,
and then the world is blind with gloom ,
ah , in a former life , i ween ,
subsequent publications may be checked in the annual prospectus .
tiflis and tomsk , and all such places .
out of my book that is not thine .
perchance may change of masks midway demand ,
de una dama que yo ví ,
with caution saying ' were this globe 's area of land
him in both knotted arms of wiry war ,
" well wist wal - wist where lay his fortune
only echoes of each other ; gentle manners and mild affections , if
see him , with pains of body , pangs of soul ,
' my eyes are dim with childish tears ,
with hideous form and mien the sight ,
sleeps the elixir , strong and old ,
echoed with concordant why ;
broke from a bower of vine and honeysuckle :
now jesus walks where greens
on spotted deer or sheep or goat .
my outward shape remains unchanged ; these eyes ,
begin the fight . "
" neither shall i mourn thy downfall ,
" for sake of this thy sister / sorrow now i bear ,
then to the cave secure thou leadest me ,
was a zealous , constant worker ,
" the red print on my forehead ,
moral which he would inculcate ; and lashes some particular
burst into leaf , and shake
when the broth was in the bowl ,
and both my arms fell , and i said ,
i never will sever from you . "
heav'n knows how seldom things are what they seem !
who had his master 's enemies in hand ,
points out to me my fabric 's flaws ,
or with that fount so lavishly imbued ,
( last of all , for they have poisons . )
and deemed her safe from jeopardy .
showering its light upon you in caresses ,
he would not make what he mislikes or slights ,
meantime the argives , although press'd alike
behind the stove , tam'd by my spells ,
too deep to flow like shallow fount
though to be tempted be no sin , until
tempora uel potius mortale resoluite pensum
themselves are rude and unpolisht : and this proves that they
the very and visible thing ,
" an author 's countless band ,
and wholesome anguish sheds !
god neptune 's palaces ! " with noise increas'd ,
gave not the gentlest hint to me .
" schoolmaster,"--and lastly , of this strange and most involuntary
and lastly what they in positions be ,
is the veteran and jurist ,
" ah , but she knew me .   and before this time
las perpetuas corrientes ;
so as he is of love a godd ,
injurious men ! who while my soul is sore
no friends applauding watched , no foes arraigned him ;
and guess'd at once with whom she had to do ) .
nightly i visit :   nor sometimes forget
bey halfe a god archares bowe .
an _ ass 's foal _ had lost its dam
and faith to stand by you and yours
franck would go scour her teeth ; and setting to ' t
all her own faults , but none of man 's .
the waters down through the valleys pour .
the jury . but it happened thus with her :
these arms wherewith we 'd vanquish fate !
just ere your petals at twilight are furled ,
then thrust my dagger , to the golden hilt ,
" ... et patulis clitumnus in arvis
their shadows , with the magic hand of chance ;
no need of you -- in woman all woes meet :
old twisted pines , where song - birds of the land
the misery is greater , as i live !
let us fare fast where such there be ,
sweet love has freed my eyes , but they are wet .
ships in argos , but i held on for pylos , and the wind never fell
i grew accustomed to you thus .   and you hailed me
into his place , and the great son returnd
said worker on true square cut stone
timmer , timber .
can make me absolutely confident--
this tale of shoes norwegian
i could not raise this fervent prayer ;
for feare the stones her tender foot should wrong ,
and though i cursed my soul , it was the brightest day i knew ,
as if ' twere like his mountain rill ,
from its original nature full of joy ,
as we rolled o'er a bridge where beneath us the roar
they all rush'd in , with sounds enough to stun ,
and reckon up what may be left of worth
i will deck thee with trophies , garlands of my defeat .   it is
and told to the wall just why
to meet all trouble from his brutish hands ,
dora 's eyes of heavenly blue
death slays and keeps her weapons out of sight .
she had wound her arms about him , and had
of that better world which thou swayest unseen !
within the hollow tomb retir'd to rest .
but here perversly subtill you’l contend
a generous people to heroic war ;
and got a thumping portion of the loan .
me , the word that i shall speak . may the wooers , on this
life - what is life ?   upon a moorland bare
an astrologer 's old quill
exposition of this aversion i commend readers to his mocking
as on a hill - top near the sun
a whip - lash to him is as dear as a rose
to the grave of caty - did:--
' tis nothing that i loved so well .
with the mouth of calf of night - time ,
and hues of tender beauty play ,
mrs . katherine 's lantern
and this by others is descried .
' put me off there at the town that lies round the bend of the
therein enjoy'd were worthy to subdue
" that cup -- thou shudderest , lady,--was it sweet ?
what is , must be ; with rhythmic laws
like water she , that yielding and combining ,
then , closing round him , to the gods we pray ,
ef he 'd seed it every mornin ' and night for forty year
who were to providence resigned .
in bending circumstances to my will :
shakespeare 's julius caesar .
and with me they have moved this company . "
evil doctrines in the young ,
_ another _ is he when the sunbeams play
_ mathias _ neuer should haue cran'd defence ,
made desperate by hungry fears ,
together taken , as men used to take
in vain he called each hero 's name ,
whose spear ill - fated makes a goddess bleed ,
anything there whence living i departed . "
i shall not look on carcassonne !
slave of this spirit of the quest . "
would n't you like to join the business ?
and heaven , as white as your goodness ,
with praise , benediction , and incense wide - flung ,
the sun set late , and left along the west
whether shall we professe some trade or skill ?
_ in quo salvator natus est . _
during which time i had been hard at work in england , and " no
man 's science is the culture of his heart ;
of this your terrible and puissant knight , "
no sinking down in time to rise
leading horse , i wander barefoot--
and in your livery let her be known ,
and all his courage seemed to fail ,
a thousand seraphs burst th ' empyrean thro ' ,
they tell us that woman was made of a rib
thus in your field my seed of harvestry
and thereinto the hurrying lie , æneas ' shape , did flee ,
how shall we turn to good this weight of ill ?
a lytell twygge plyant is by kynde
on , on across the level plain they flew ;
juggler , constable , king , must bow .
heav'n - fall'n , in station stood or just array ,
e'en when the real fair is mouldering in her tomb--
he who lov'd best , and them defended best ,
no more is our garden the husband of light ,
wouldst thou deliver from the stroke of fate
and give them utterance in one pure face ,
under the feet of his white creatures ,
beside , the conflux and congeries
i have never disclosed until now--
fourteen hundred years are past ,
when hearts are sere and pithless ?   land of the sword and lyre !
' seldom it haps to any to pursue
and the sunshine and shadder fell over it all ;
for oranges and tea ;
where star - shine shimmered through the white
guiltless of testicles , they tear their throats ,
without the sure guess of well - practised feet .
an ' paitricks scraichin ' loud at e'en ,
a las que con ordenança
beauteous thou art , therefore to be assail'd ;
a triple of plumes his crest adorn'd ,
" kaw ! " they said , " what tales you tell us ! "
and the ravens ' beaks are moistened
let stanley ride cockhorse behind thee--
to gather moss , i fail to see .
were reserved for the efforts of cabot the bold .
from their tired bodies wipe the dust away ,
we tremble not for him ;
tho ' here they scrape , an ' squeeze , an ' growl ,
in the esthonian market - place ,
the goddess , great in mischief , views their pains ,
which vexed all the folks on the border .
it could not be an angel fair and good . "
only subject to these experiences as spirits of the most refined
the many fiery seeds , and with that fire
i am content ; nay , more , she can not do
“ who takes thy offerings with a grateful hand .
the auld will speak , the young maun hear ;
the youth , who daily farther from the east
o spring , o day not halved with lingering night ;
his friend came down to meet the ferry
and many flowers , ere eight years more are done ,
till through the stillness of the poet 's soul ,
and from the silent shades of death
an ' foolish notion .
but a servant when he reigneth
and so ve vent avay .
border , bearing me along upon his breast , as his own son , and not
that they never were made in new york .   by her hat
have seen such men desiring fruitlessly ;
these from thy doors . now mark me : close attend .
the thought of it made mother cry ,
bloody dissectors , worse than ten monroes !
that charm of life will hald by ;
you waves , though you dance by my feet like children at play ,
or roses , being withered _ ;
and you made our bearing women toil
on some refulgent morn of may ,
ready help i 'll bring thee / hither unto this land ,
his listless limbs unable for the course ,
shall give a pitying side glance to me ,
next , when she all in readiness espied ,
flung at night from angel hands
in the rake with copper handle .
so spake he , and athene was mightily angered at heart , and
and feigne hemself to be so wise ,
a man with women following seen .
o magna carthago , probrosis
and quenches starlight overhead .
with melted wax , astolpho gives command ;
so fell these two beneath aeneas ' hand ,
more than a thousand , who of old from heaven
and may deck me like a bridegroom . "
twilight has veiled the little flower - face
fair fa ' your honest sonsie face ,
rather , that i have cast much ca nt ,
the castled crag of drachenfels ,
the timid good may stand aloof ,
that warms another living breast . "
a tribe that never would love god . the songs
describes his course of manly years ,
the girl i left behind me .
both noplés and commiblés ; gained valterne
where heaves the turf in many a mould'ring heap ,
downward athwart each set and steadfast face ,
had almost made him damn the name of knight ,
to one such i would say ,
and , like new flowers at morning song of bees ,
at best but circle - windsails of a mill .
the temper of those men peered out--
pr .                               the wrath of zeus .
and one , that ran in the midst , came near us--
his compassion will endure ! _ "
for the mead 's boundary or river 's right ,
as for john 's part , whether ' twere false , or true ,
witness , thou sinai ! whose cloud - cover'd height ,
in the private social circle ,
of the millennial day ,
when i thought i would mould you , an image from my life for men
fain promise never more to disobey ;
gama directs the king to hoist the portuguese flag and
their old , melodious madrigals of love !
like afric 's priests , let out the flame for hire .
be that to thee full sicker . " / to him did the fair maid incline .
blindly and recklessly?--some future day ,
para que adornes tu frente ,
let rigor go , that right and justice be
and love is no better for chilling--
and am forlorn , finding in you the one
dost thou peep out ,
by _ pedant - rules _ to circumscribe the mind :
you are going to be married almost immediately , and should not
blind fate has bludgeoned my bent head ,
in music with his order , and the king .
the happy light abroad is spread ;
pleased to find , in this translation , the gratitude , or at
sibyl herophila who interpreted the dream , while other ancient
that noble hearts in every age
power distribute !
dynasties , cut in slabs of sand - stone , or on granite - blocks ,
you 're a privileged guest at all manner of dinners ;
made sacred by your feet .
an arrow hissed from the unerring bow ,
of ades , dwelling of the shadowy dead ,
my head hath its coronal ,
increased by synaloepha in :
mirth - giver bacchus , fail thou not from midst our mirth ! be kind ,
no hand to toy with mine ? no lips so sweet
true to yourself and sheets , you 'll have me swear ;
they 're angular , or smooth and fat ,
and clamour down the whispers of regret .
our place of meeting , and no gathered host
while they adore me on the throne of hell .
in offerings to my shade to share ,
would gambol long beneath the noontide ray ,
" in polar frosts my spirits glow--
had called on his lady , and stopp'd to tea .
all power is his , and whatsoe'er he wills ,
i had a little hobby - horse ,
stronghold by a faithless steward ( alba ) . but , thanks to arthur 's
two tedious acts were past ;
pre - eminent by so much odds , while thou
my furlough here in nice . "
for me ,
as my pythoness erst sometimes erred from not knowing
and all you venerable and innocent joys ,
and to our friend ’s assistance fly ,
is my love to me .
and robin will go .
what force can love repel ?
as where he may his wearied courser ease ,
he had gone but little distance ,
but ere they eat of that most ample fate ,
from zone to zone , four hundred years ago!*3 *
daughter of god and man , accomplished eve ,
how best to storm the giant ’s isle . ”
hath hover'd o'er me , giving me in charge
here on his breast they lead the morris - dance ,
and manifold when i am dead the gift will i repay . "
easily has the mercy of the great lord come upon me .
and all the heavens were bare :
first the sharp lance was by atrides thrown ;
sweden , etc . [ con . from v of _ columbian mag . _ ]
the wretched parents all that night
for _ catching _ is to _ take them in _ .
if thou ask me , dear , wherefore
he bent to his work , ironing away ;
if sounds of sweet content you love to hear ;
the regent power i thought to wield ,
ye are drunk with the sound of your braggart
soft - warbling flutes the ruby lip commands ,
for i have learned to hate betrayers ;
and every gem that lofty pride desires ;
realm reposes in such great love and in such great delight that
forth alone ,
thus spoke achilles ; straight uprose the might
herself . given to eat with dogs ,
unconscious , till the dawning of the day :
he poured the potion out ,
we know not , on these hills of ours ,
and gliding , with smooth step , into my bower .
mary ! i want a lyre with other strings ,
right in we went , with soul intent
and if one ship misbehave ,
summers only eight in all
that sithen that i hidir cam
but the traveller heard , ah , never a thing :
patron or intercessor none appeerd ,
her vast infinitude of waste v[=a]riety untold ,
from all my plots and borders look .
even as a blind man 's fingers wander o'er
in psyche 's tortured heart began to move ,
thy state to thy father straight disclose . ”
the whole huge world of sorrow i must carry .
and , sunk in sorrow , hangs his languid head ;
your vessel loaded , and your traffic pass'd ,
if haply yet they live , with brass and gold
as from a thousand thuribles ,
the dear wish of the fool--
establish tyrants or destructive laws ,
with those eyes "             ben jonson
and all that are of priam 's line .
that his aino had departed ,
into the fig - tree 's shadows , where there perched
whereof signs yet appear , was wrapt in flames ;
cried till i lay exhausted , sick , unfriended ,
in a fragrant coronet ,
i know it is over at last !
erigonen ictuque nepam spolioque leonem
bring me words of splendid sound !
while her knee with fire is kindled ,
all earth forgot , and all heaven around us--
here at life 's and april 's end
like a sharp blow from behind ,
take thy limbs living , and new - mould with these
a dominance like that . and what 's the state
but this one can not wonder at ,
in judging poets it suffices
so stood eliza on the wood - crown'd height ,
" _ whippoorwill ! whippoorwill ! _ "
all in a moment through the gloom were seen
working through love , upon thir hearts shall write ,
and cheek by jowl , with many a growl ,
there 's a pleasant trip before us . '
the silence of the sea !
a way enchased with glass and beads , i. 111 .
the light of faith which can not die ,
death that combats him beside the stream whereof the sea hath no
hard is that heart which beauty makes not soft .
only for her , who did stay with a stare
my heart is homing where her summer - roses grow .
safely , with all his portion of the spoil .
if not from side to side this rarity
of those who cross its vast immensity ,
to sit upon thy father david 's throne ,
ten of us was throwed right freely
nor yet where deva spreads her wisard stream :
" now grant us thy grace ! "
perhaps , to meet again . but who is she ,
but they shall win the victory ne’er
then , skirting the trees on a carpet of snow ,
guarding from harm or hurt the dear old home .
i wolde have leie and slepe stille ,
no man , nor ask any question . '
that clause is hard ) ; and secondly , proceed ;
" what writest thou?"--the vision raised its head ,
and i am shamed for ever ; ' and he said ,
" a girl laughed , i think--
piloting over the wind - dappled blue
' midst foes and strangers , to a land of peace ,
e resta in tremolar l'onda marina
what hope pygmalion yet might have , when he
' oo said i knew when the _ jumner _ was due ?
_ el dos de mayo _ , in which he exults over the rising of
messapus and catillus , post your force
and with one blow that pagan downward falls ;
but in his eyes a mist unwonted rises ,
with thundering hoofs and shuddering , hoar ,
" to this too will i give ye answer true ;
into the centre of thy kingdom sweep ,
" ay , ay , " she exclaimed , " did yer spake of the child ?
que había la canción interrumpido ,
after dinner walk a mile--
maketh answer to the clock ,
y was a yew ,
what love i bore to thee .
transfix'd his liver , and down dropp'd his sword .
mrs . g. and then it will be all gone . ( shivers . )
where at dusk ye unlimbered ,
the cold wind burns my face , and blows
here the chronicle reminds us
vhich to dem on - belongs ,
call home the heart you gave me !
so came they homewards , but the snake - king 's child ,
my old accustom'd corner here is ,
send the tallest of thy handmaids ,
if i fight in the fray and win ?
what heart - felt pleasure it did to him yield !
she calls and calls each vagabond by name .
' a most amusing contribution to the literature of the fiscal
if i ca nt ride this prancer ,
shall be the mighty lombard 's courtesy ,
she knew how wonderful a child he was
that public shame would still the deed attend ,
at times she 'll be laughing , seldom smile ,
the tall trees have to say ,
why , ling'ring , stand ye thus aloof , and wait
flooded with sheeny waves the marble floor ,
azure it waved and white,--
as i kept sinking slowly:-
but nothing stirred within the glimmering cavern ,
my heartstrings almost broke ,
the university of pennsylvania , which position he held for
he had a back for pitching hay .
lacon .   for a kiss or two , confess ,
and would to phoebus , pallas , and to jove ,
his flowing locks , who holdeth of lycia
ne'er lightens , nor thaumantian iris gleams ,
with argive foes without the high - built wall .
some dear remembrance in a weary breast .
shame is for wrong , and not for innocence--
lend to the heavy hours unwonted fleetness ;
and light our loss of thee !
now on the left , and on the right flank now ,
subsistence for the next day . '
may margaret now as then ,
since over all the year 's content
she look'd ; a flavour of such bitterness
and _ never _ did a fouler scheme make conquest more complete .
i lift up my eyes to apollo ,
her romance of death and sin ,
open and bright and lofty , whence each one
every duty find ;
the angry foaming waters
that she had puzzled all the acutest hinters ,
" roman , that moves thy breast to know the fates ?
or poorest of the beggar clan .
in a few minutes bennie had on his clothes and tiptoeing down the
but when i play at love at a lady 's commanding ,
till all the summer flowers went by--
erect for speech .   but soon a sight appear'd ,
and the stately spanish men to their flagship bore him then ,
my dear sir,--
that the dead are not evermore dead :
upon their backs
a cavern of cool shade .
a thought of observation on the foe ;
political circumstances which produced so unparalleled a progress
though the worlds in flame should perish ,
tell me , what is amiss with thee ?
that laid our idol low ?
as don the sterrës in the frosty night .
we two , how long we were fool'd ,
who feeds our hearts with fame .
by storied hill and hallowed grot ,
  _ noctua chamomilla._--the moth attaches itself close to the
my walls receiv'd him ; for a violent wind
set a thousand guards upon her ,
laden with blossoms and rain ,
watches , lidless , day and night ;
only for new dreams !
does mother think my soul is shy ?
compares the solitary soul to a swan ;
the shadows and lights hurl their
in faith assured we waited as in patience thou didst wait ,
i can not suffer that thou , great soul ,
{ 13 }   lycaon , the first werewolf .
on his shoulders , reins and halter ,
my faith shall wax , when thou art in thy waning !
a green silk purse she brought ,
knees , but i am in great distress ; yesterday made the twentieth
" whose pulse in every vein beats strong ,
its singing surpasseth      the sweetest of music .
in the seraglio , where the ladies lay
the ducal cause , we know
" in your own trouble you have thought of me .
' t is the seal , despair , --
to intromit true light , that fain would glide
the meadows are fringed ,
of all yet don ; a creature who not prone
on the saddest child of northland ;
just for once thou mun sit idle ,
i sang it under the wildwood tree .
and sugar sweet -- and you ,
when out from a cloud a pale star beamed ,
the first foe in the field ;
onward he press'd , and kept him still in sight ;
their glory shall inherit and prolong ?
yet art thou oft with me ;
the youths return’d not from the doubtful plain ,
to walk st . martin 's lane ;
every moment -- and again !
seared my body to action--
' twixt himself and the big wine - tun ;
it , and then flayed it . they cut out the thigh - bones , wrapped
what bills the banker past to friends ,
with a sad leaden downward cast
on my head a stone is loaded .
upon the casement 's panes , and lost
out of the littleness that wraps my days ,
with no returns to show ,
had been moses mendelsohn . "
luxurians , luduntque jubae per colla , per armos .
an ' by degrees
with such a tempest , with such scathe o'erlaid ,
for joy to my heart
undid the collar from his throat ,
ay , that 's the very chime ,
' have i not earned my cake in baking of it ?
who sow with loving care
they too will we d the morrow morn :
" so the greyhounds are mine , then , " says pug number two ,
so huge its bulk , the ocean 's azure hue .
and the rock - crystal of the brine ;
so , sir , you see ' twas nae daft vapour ;
a nice piece from her plate .
built strongly day by day--
put him away ; for both shed tears to think
with a fugitive resentment in your eyes :
but all unconscious of the coming doom ,
they will not say i can not live beyond the weary night ,
the tyrant lived , the hero fell!--
we cast this earthly body and attain
in wild excitement when he hears
with morning light !
it would bring back the fragrance
" take me , " but turn the blade and ye shall see ,
the spirit from life 's pain :
_ sure on our birth some friendly planet shone ;
of his complexion he was sanguine .
we drove through the winter weather .
because ye disobeyed the word of god , and tasted of this horror .
nor their hearts be filled with anguish ,
a sacrifice unto the deities ;
all the hills and valleys levelled .
her lids with anguish , drew from her the moan :
satan . wilt not believe he 's god 's son then ?           b.
her sport will leave , nor cast one look behind ,
a lessening image , trembling thro ' their tears .
of cloudless climes and starry skies ;
as escort honoured , safe , and fair ,
i took the tiny ringlet , golden -- fair ,
thou sayest ?
to drift apart for ever ,
and casting woo ' to me .
front , for i wish to be between , so that the tail can not do thee
if anger be engrafted on ill - will ,
" i know what palette - knifing means . what was the piccy ? "
' young jimmy gurney 's been upon the tiles . '
the morning came , and with alacrity
as falls to earth the golden grain ,
a life that is turning to grey
and your leaves hide his face .
" my muse , although she be but country - bred ,
and dryborough , where with chiming tweed
and lit upon the ship , whose timbers creaked
spare't for their sakes wha aften wear it ,
lingered that other , staring after him ;
home from thy dust , to empty their own glass ;
with mast , and helm , and pennon fair ,
eurybates , and ulysses treated him with greater familiarity than
with pleasant comrades whom we know ,
such master spirits only feel ,
that i scholde otherwise wene
and many a bloody day have labour'd through ,
and now at your cõma[=u]dement i am redy
her loue to him was neuer halfe so great ,
for february , 1771 , entitled ' twitcher 's advocate , ' ' jemmy
i saw then , for before i had not seen it ,
superfluous salamanders , whereat the captain was overjoyed .
like a star of heaven ,
voluntary power to compare our trains of ideas with our
subject was vice too high to be yet exposed .   the time , however ,
the warm blood coursing true .
she was three and i was four ;
and least to seaton would his child have shown
with sharp rebukes , wordes lewde and vnkynde
like a high - born maiden
and tired i am of bog and road ,
you fail to understand and find but madness
all rites for parted souls required .
upon the polar hem ,
i saw the brimmed bowl in her grasp
tol de rol .
this the heritage is of the child of the lord ,
into the heav'n , that is unbodied light ,
gnomes ! your bold forms unnumber'd arms outstretch ,
to be with thee is now my pleasure .
the fennel of my days on wasted ground ,
recklessness .
as chastely as the morning dews kiss flowers :
whisper and never fear ,
i strayed all witless with my loose hair flying ,
and all astonished with deepe dismay
where stand or fall her friends or foes ,
degenerates ; and the old veterans are soon succeeded by a new
an awful tempest mashed the air ,
and i see the limbs that a greek slave cut
richly deck thy native stem :
waiting on the shore and wailing .
as the mist resembles the rain .
and the gladness of your looks ?
for if any criticisers
( laurence minot : _ battle of halidon hill . _ 1352 . )
excuse me , you 're a painter , are you not ?
when ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it
then when " there was i , " thou shalt make thy boast ,
haughty lords of all the riches
yea ! those who learn
i never knew but one , and here he lies .
listened laughing and applauding ,
assessing minds , he does not need ,
the storm had fall'n upon the oak
the eyes he loves ,
then cousin will came up to view
and have you nobler made even one weak heart ,
when we a company of souls encountered ,
with passionate , dreaming , wistful eyes ,
though not unwilling here to admit
that snaebiorn 's lips of love had pressed .
howe'er she plot our ruin , ' twill sure and sudden fall .
will bring about for thee a happier old age at the last ,
fruit , blossom , viand , amber wine , and gold .
to the people they 're ollers ez slick ez molasses ,
" in its devotion nought irregular
i give you gratitude in this :
breath'd her kind whispers to my ravish'd ear !
and there was purport in her looks for him ,
his hell - dogs , and their chase , and the fair throng
" o mother , from thy memories proud ,
he names not me ; but these are hints
quoth tancred , " lo , a subtle squire i have ,
committing grave misdemeanours in the public streets ,
almost akin to gladness , and she woke .
the source of human thought its tribute brings
they hasten to their sire with screams of joy ,
who should come up the road one day
and wild - rose branches take their finest scent
since the pioneer council
and taken argier 's mighty shape ; in show
shall he reflect our great humanity .
our name a pillory , a scaffold and a stake
except the one truth that creates the scene .
of jove and the olympian summit sought
of slaughter'd men ; the earth was red with blood ;
the pride of the parterre .
hang on such thorns , and play as wantonly
their legs were old burnt matches ,
will fully comprehend the why and wherefore
a - begging at a beggar 's door .
among whom god will deigne to dwell on earth
` and over al this i pray yow , ' quod she tho ,
what if with wreaths my empty hands are bound ?
the imperishable presences serene ,
i would buy it , beg it , steal it ,
to love a bear or cow .
desque de vos me party
thunder against the powers of spain and rome ,
the name of this one , wherefore my answer was so full .
famous for oranges and women -- he
how i hereon stood shivering and aghast ,
deliverer from new lords , leader to free
but t ’ oud foak thinks thair’l be some stinks ,
thy golden radiance from the mountain side ;
some ghost i overlooked , when i was there .
though delight from desert
wailed , ' o my god , will daylight never come ? '
and while she stood upon her toes ,
its holding to rot where it fell .
the sun was sinking in the west ,
that somebody read aloud ,
the sumptuous tribute of the sea 's wide reign ,
holy , holy , holy ! though the darkness hide thee ,
to gadre wode , as he dede er ,
to thoughts like planets and to acts like flowers ,
and pray they under skies less overcast ,
quick the boat rolled to the billows
wafting in triumph all the flowery braids ,
about my health and french most flattering ;
where is my own true lover gone ,
historic pantomime in modern days ;
provokes his fury ; stiff upon his neck
they are taking leave of one another now ,
of ganelon , who the treason wrought ,
he must sore stody , for without dilygence
thou , wretched nino , thou alone canst know .
a beast forth sallied on the scout ,
in the face of the sultry skies ,
" than faithful love unchanging , could one the blessing find ,
of france , and asks the coroner to hear
and amend this flood of damage ,
were really very strange ,
but still , when all is said ,
i gained momentum down the ridge ,
that ben to drede on every side .
in other lands where other songs be sung ;
that clasped the ribbands of that azure sea ,
the weary heavens welcome ,
with a swift move , and a half - angry frown .
that follow'd the mystical moon through the night .
crown the divine _ dorinda _ 's matchless laies :
pure and made apt for mounting to the stars .
( what uncle william told the children )
for vnkynde folys if one labour dylygent
that e'en i wept at entering .   various tongues ,
a little bird sings in its bough ,
a sallow and dusty group reclined ;
the high resolves , the bright revealings
thus parten thei the world on thre .
from arctic lands , whereof a single breath
come close to me , dear annie , while i bind a lover 's knot .
and quaff'd his last life 's glow ,
' tis printed in the mind of gods for ever ,
_ counter - attack _ appeared in 1918 . in this volume sassoon turned
nor carried bawdy presents to a bride :
as i rode .
so oft with blubber'd eyes :
none but officers might join them ,
( when thus i speak of course i mean--_to me _ )
ah ! what dainty viands cheer'd that proud company !
and founde that be no bataille
of them the highest , for such of shape may seem
el orgullo viril de ser valiente .
until sweet isabella 's untouch'd cheek
so here , from heel to point , glided the flames .
creditors whose pursuit he tried to escape by killing himself .
but nobler sorrows lift the musing mind ,
tho ' hundreds worship at his word ,
but brief her unworthy triumph when
large euclid 's strict epitome ;
his flock come bleating home ; the seaman hears
ye both must yield to me ; and in times past
she held her value and could claim her worth ;
and lines with balsam all the nobler parts .
is a hard sentence of an ancient date :
with that deep insight which detects
all the vast unfathomed chaos .
no thief is hafbur the king . "
then over all , that he might be
whom love hath warmed , in philosophic shades ;
they were but ill supplied ,
non temere ulla ui conuinci posse putabant ;
who knows but thou mayst deck the pate
raising my murderous axe on high ;
and what reason have i to presume this poor life
and a little pocket - handkerchief to wipe his pretty nose .
while pharaoh 's charioteers and horsemen sank
over the grave of the summer hours
like a mantle over his shoulder .
la trompa guerrera
at this , of all feasts the most splendid ? "
from reputations now defaced ;
upstarting , she then for the first time descried
that hath thy bow and quiver charm'd ;
down with the brood accursed !
overleaning , with flickering meaning and sign ,
--"is he gone ? " rumbled yonder.--
in shabby keeping with his half - tilled lands ;
and kingly gives to all that ask ;
one brought a bird that could whistle a tune
and the man was come like a shadow ,
sang a storm - wind in the heavens ,
and far more weighty than conjecture brings ;
frightening people out of their wits ,
and life 's last music sighs itself away
even this did aias from his brawny hand
who noblest seems , and offers richest dow'r .
feels patriot feelings in his heart ,
or who , in desperate doubt of grace ,
of childer she 'd lots and would lend you their cots , and although
the bush and its ways ,
that from no high race she springeth ;
her mother asked her father to buy elenor
resolved to find it .
dismayed by the baying of the hounds ; even though the man be too
yonder is thy mother 's body ,
and then there came a kind of mist between us ;
their lances poised , their helmets laced ,
eats and recites some lamentable rhyme ;
i wish my grave were growing green ,
the mariner beneath the gateway passed .
i heard it sweep
she flew east , and she flew west ,
the blue river onward flowing
we would not , to the vulgar crowd ,
seeking his child ! old man , he will not rest , ...
gitchee péz - ze - u -- the panther ,
but mortal men with mortal kidneys . '
ah ! ' tis cold marble ! artist , who hast wrought
even the wind knows not its ancient will ,
and added , " our true arthur , when he learns ,
parcell'd to wasteful ranks and orders ,
the brownies reached a river bank ;
a heavenly shadow of the grace it wore
thy god 's , and truth 's .
we die , but there 's life in the bowl ,
upon the grass ; he was so strangely moved
in the day of little things.--
vi monstruos execrables ,
smote by the arm of jove with dire dismay ,
i s’pose my head is like a chest ,
and what one has another thinks he needs ,
men petted and praised and pursued me ,
uatis etrusci , modo qui perenne
above whose utmost western edge there hung an open sky ;
till , lo ! among the western skies
" now stick to it , all , for the post is near ! "
of the governor 's mansion in jerusalem , looking toward
altho ' of course proprietors are not to blame .
or cold and dreary stretches of white space . "
and men , like birds affrighted , hurried homeward in despair .
and sang , with his incomparable art ,
had he seen _ these _ , i knew he would advise
behold her , single in the field ,
don . c.      command me always .
nor steed nor soldier can oppose the gods :
and has a width of more than half a mile .
' nd i havin' my opinyin uv him .
is n't the public lucky that we did n't
with lapland witches , while the labouring moon
or else we 'd gained the day .
now press upon each other ,
for of all ladies there are none who chuse
then the aged väinämöinen ,
and this is what she had to say :
sobre las cumbres que florece mayo
and blew on still . then were silenced
and pats of honeyed palms , and rare caresses ,
if thou slayest wainamoinen ,
i bade good morrow ,
one grab silver ,
awa ' whigs , awa ' !
you simply sit and work your feet
with one great dwelling in the middle of it ;
randolph caldecott 's
where the surf beats white and high .
but yet a union in partition ,
we landed in wind - swept skagway .   we joined the weltering mass ,
when banners wave and streamers play ,
an ' gin she take it ill , jo ,
in winter , when it snows ,
there is this that you can do : " play the game " ; there honor lies .
and put him out of fauour
what i have granted , let her have your aid :
of british tars with naked cutlasses .
its fragment of song !
that never were worth a moment 's sadness .
strong one , even upon thy brow ,
by chronicler might never / written be nor told
i am far away--
both heav'n and earth would go to rack ,
the land of warrior thracians .   then these wives ,
the beautiful style that has done honour to me .
i looked and saw your love in the shadow of your heart ,
and the year
to - morrow .
y á los balcones llegaba .
and whenso love of letters did inspire
but it is back to old england , after all , that we look for the
" thus it is our daughters leave us ,
but self - respect remains -- nor place for hate ;
and strown .
who hates the wrongs they have done .
marcus aurelius . but the stifling den
plied he the door , so that i was content .
you couldna see her lily feet ,
their tresses tore , and beat their breasts , and screamed .
freshening the ocean where it shone ,
up or down --
grunt up a solemn , lengthen'd groan ,
they speak o ' wiles in woman 's smiles ,
safe in their cares , the auxiliar forces sleep ,
which no phisicien can hele .
nunquam ego te vita frater amabilior
while , mid these victims of the torch ,
dey tantzed him off in a carmagnole ,
the day was when i did not keep myself in readiness for thee ; and
caught him by the foot and flung him into the river to go down
i am captain here -- confound you!--or i 'll know the reason why .
the midnight of a vauxhall rout
we two were married , due and legal :
the blessed gentleness of trees ,
in swift obedience to his consort 's words ,
his conseil tok upon this thing ,
y las manos aviva
now while thou speakest , never has my heart
more near he saw , and still more near ,
yeilded with coy submission , modest pride ,
where hunters fand the murder'd bairn ;
i saw the loath moon rise ,
us quickly through the fields of air .
no shadow should darken our brows !
to sea - king glaucus ' wild wood cavernous
the spider 's touch , how exquisitely fine !
have quite outgone their own arithmetic .
the dignity of the accursed ;
that wanders home to - day .
unshadowed haunts of darkling doom !
swore , very roundly , _ à la militaire _ ,
though friends betrayed and foes belied ;
of his defrauded and destin'd reign .
since their kin is afar .
fool ! shall each wronged and restless spirit dare
industrious habits can , at times , repress
the principle 's the same .
intensely human , cast from mortal clay
this anguish'd earth shines on the moon -- a moon .
can strike us dead , with ghastly fear ,
but heaven has providentially decreed that these evil
he amply had his wearied strength restored ,
and future years of bliss alone remain .
the lintwhites in the hazel braes ,
" and on the organ learn to make
“ oft , grav'n on tablets , were his amorous words
merely a brief proclamation ) appear to possess on the people .
" the noise of life begins again ,
it was the song that makes the world go round ;
gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly ,
and only comes thy sufferings to spy , '
many a time - honour'd fabric , has driven the poor thing to exile .
and swift and wide ,
as mexitli arose from her ashes ,
changing unnoted while i gazed thereon .
dem .                          now tell me , child ,
but still i 'll do those menial tasks as cheerfully as could one ,
blessed,--ere the frail fingers featly
swift he bared his blade of battle , flung it
as showed her wealth , and well declared her wit ;
where hangs the christ with nail - pierced feet .
which , though its thunderous voice be loud ,
a whelming shower of leafy trees .
nor heedless by the way
what have i done to keep in mind
your hands once touched this table and this silver ,
all that deep sympathy :
in a sea - green day ;
fill from the fountain the etruscan urn !
but , losh ! i tak ' it sair amiss
the night will pale .   the day will dawn .   we shall look at each
and so i raved , and cast in hope
and now the only sounds i hear
we here , full - charged with our own maimed and dead ,
and hollow voices from the murmuring mere .
o ' the meek wild - flowers i playmates made ,
for their fast coming years , and speak of them
what if you should sink again
armed to ride among her angry foes ,
declare even now
longer is he than a roof - tree ,
to flame or light us .
i mumbled toasts over bubbling wine--
and they wrangle and they fight
she smote her shield , and , with indignant look ,
pure as the lily buds that dream
y destrás del rey devoto ,
with no allaying thames ,
" ... the first warbler , whose sweet breath
the storm has spread over all :
that bends not as i tread .
sir oluf questioned the knight eftsoon
for the sake of those who at home await .
thus a tree sprang
is hard to win without much holiness .
on that treacherous bank ,
and to the work of warfare strung
in the countries of the northland .
or corne , or cattle , or such other ware ,
down the world with marna ,
the irresistible appeals
what chief shall combat , let the gods decide .
leave the tram - car 's jarring jangle
e'en such was i in that close - crowding throng ;
sad is the lonely sea--
but therewithal they speed their way as led the road along ;
a man who does not move with pain , but moves
in the hope of living , dying , near that sweetness of your mouth ?
then , o'er the pillow of a furious priest ,
shall we , who struck the lion down , shall we
but not expressed in fancy ; rich , not gaudy :
through which the harmless lizard glancing crept .
said i to the laddy
last year 's cotton - plants , desolately bowing ,
for the wonder of the word
his song is rapture , for he sees
the false love for the true .
ere that death - pyre burned out .   up to the heavens
sobbing , throbbing , in its falling
with bloodshot eyes the morning rose
the grey smoke towers .
_ the snow in the street and the wind on the door . _
unseemly to beare rule , which was thy part
with his knees beyond the gateway .
sum miser , et de me quod doluere nihil !
' do me this grace , my child , to have my shield
character . here again we should observe the author employing his
nor can avenging time restore my right :
and sweet , on music 's wings , to flee
quelled panic with authoritative calm ,
to that lady dwelling in his inmost soul
the better disclose his glory : whence
from the great mountains to the atlantic waves
all are kings and queens , dear ,
than thou believest ; grandchild of the chaste
there 's nought inside but rags and jags
the sun drew in -
i lanely wander sair depress'd ,
the powers to whom i pray abhor this fact ,
and preith his fader to respite .
her heavy anthem still concludes in woe ,
that freely some great wrong forgives ;
then shall the scatter'd atoms crowding come
the o'er - sunned bloom of summer 's plain ,
o mielikki , forest - hostess ,
roars through the desert , and demands his young ;
one , and two figures blended in one form
they linger side by side ;
once they were pretty things :
and his arrival by an embassy
greet you , my brother ! for i am all things--
who hang so fiercely on the flying gaul ,
i grine ma teet ' , i pull ma hair ,
light the black lips of cannon , and the sword
its grasses by the top ;
this mutiny each part doth so surprise
she wearies with an ill unknown ;
he leith doun his on ere al plat
even as in a dance ; and her smile can heal no less :
and shun this death . and as for thee , helmsman , thus i
to fond pretence of immortality ,
men of the time--_earlier issues _ .
" is man , that thou art mindful " thus " of him . "
till , like one man , ten thousand hands applaud ,
shall live my highland mary !
makes the creator visible to all
so many lives cemented and made strong .
from shuddering profundities where shapes
that he as phantom lingers there
i do but state what many view ,
sleep slayeth all belief
its golden clangors and crying flames of emotion as it mounts up
i think my grandsire now would turn
to speak with me , do so that i may hear thee ,
and held in wondering faith for miles around .
he scorns to mingle , mindful of his source ,
" this place has branded me ; i must regain
at three , i went and tried the clubs ,
for every beast god 's care avails ;
the moon has lost her memory .
all the names i know from nurse :
grim , and awful , and desolate ?
the tempting stream , with one small drop to loose
from which position he appears to be aiming at the scorpion .
then they drew the net and dragged it ,
half in rest , and half in strife ,
sche hath under the goddes cure .
sometimes is felt to be ,
the tender patient calling of his voice
all alone went hiawatha .
by which it seems life 's changeful hours
here the lost empress half resumes her reign;--
the " innocent brightness " of an infant 's face .
as thine ancestres dede er this :
meanwhile , i trust him ; and i know his way
of a ship that goes a - sailing on the pond ;
sub pedibus regitur terra fretumque tuis .
iniquity it is ; but pass the can .
never listen'd , i swear , more unquestioningly ,
stabbing the eyes ; and as i stumbled out
some well - pleasing tale ,
retrospection . how far could wordsworth at fourteen have been
couched on his own dear flower , the daughter of the lake :
minerva breathes , and pilots me apollo ,
and hail thee conqueror in the strife ;
for the debit side 's increasing in a most alarming way ;
i missed mine . how dreary marbles ,
to the curtains with a sigh :
of the sweet draught that ne'er would satiate me ;
one zealous imp flew upward from the place ,
with fear unspeakable ye shun the fight ? "
my heart is awed within me when i think
¡ guerra , guerra , españoles ! en el betis
and a voice in my soul breaks into song .
who spies us from yon pomegranate bush ,
wait -- do not flash your eyes so ! understand
or hear what to my mind first thoughts present ,
but freely doest of what thee list entreat,@
still from his book , a mystic seer ,
charge , charge , ' tis too late to retreat !
all in the most martial manner
so stood the danaï , nor fled nor fear'd .
awake ! awake , o throstle sweet !
no land , than juba 's realm ; by rumour 's voice
longa patris , si quis pulsatae conscius anguem
hosts raised by fear , and phantoms of a day :
yet strife is its name !
and kiss , kiss , kiss ! "
admir'd and prais'd -- and there the homage ends :
whose worn faces have been lifted
life , flowing like a river , almost gone
this truth survives alone :
its hold upon the popular mind . it is related of thomas
price twenty - four shillings , is all that 's required .
if you approve my scheme , our ninety men
halls in waiting for his helmet .
over his lord both straw and hay ,
a stranger one -- one allen gray,--
look up calantha ; for , befal what may ,
the cleft stone sighing to the curious air ?
but as for little bill he made him
deudor de su racimo ;
seemed to have survived his understanding , answered , " it has so . "
the sound of thy voice we can never forget ,
she saw him chained and shamed .
then pronous with his glitt'ring spear he struck ,
no coming foe shall scan ;
till their branches meet in the waves below ,
bring thee to ithaca , and who did they avow them to be ? for
he kill'd a mouse within his house ,
some chorus girls and men were singing that song
to come in eny place nyh
she would move brandimart to this emprize ;
afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans ;
brave gama 's decks might reek with lusian blood :
through the death mist hovering o'er me ,
the eldest oyster looked at him ,
and what could make their muscles taut
whereon was figur'd heauen ; and there anent
babylonians , was received ; and , for his known valour , so far
" he pays me for my pictures ; but he will not pay my ransom . "
here some are grand in gems and silk ,
one day , when out a - hunting for the _ mus ridiculus _ ,
travel one day , then a second ,
of prothöenor 's life ! to me he seems
and asked them mid that silence why
and hush the landscape to its last repose ;
in a field of goldnen parley
the days and nights pass swiftly by
and quick , and ready this new hope and aid ,
which needs to wedded man must welcome prove .
gie me within my straining grasp
women love self - sacrifice
wading the naiad clears her brook that streaks
who , praying always , prays in sleep .
back on foes that never spare ,
and would have done so , had not she
of unhurt remembrances ,
_ haly _ , holy ; " haly - pool , " holy well with healing properties .
before the di'mond 's brighter blaze ;
and the last ray through the pines
and , looking from this moment back ,
they made to be the cause of holy thoughts ;
instant in prayer , i ask of god the wings
" you 'll not forsake my dear daughter ,
and his children in the workhouse
mockery--
among us to bewaile and bemoane the perplexities of love , " and by
to angad came with one accord
the work went wild and well ?
and their proud souls down to the infernal shade ,
a persian lord this day , and strip his corpse ,
the sound of the bagpipes shall wake him no more .
the goddess of our hands ? " yea , yea , but where
to yáma ’s halls is báli borne .
' tis but one poor fool the fewer when the greedy jack - daw dies . "
lo ! where the crucified christ from his cross is gazing upon you !
this solemn sympathy poor venus noteth ,
romance brought up the nine - fifteen .
how to continue and conclude my tale , for the hand of heaven has
their limits be their list , their reason will .
nec meritis ( quamquam ipsa iuuant magis ) afuit illis ,
+ x        the virgin mary , on losing the child jesus         r. wi .
where peeps she , the nurse of seed ,
and the boys attacked and we ' ad a fight ,
while at the stook the shearers cow'r
stoop , hermes , let me breathe upon thy brow ,
up sprang again undaunted / the full doughty man ,
she shall tumble and laugh . . .
while ever the northland cried in glee :
ultra curasti solers , perituraque mecum
and smiles at situations which it can not see . "
so brandishes his blade and flings him down ;
great in your smiles -- weak in your arm--
the routed greeks , so intermix'd they fall
of ancient fashion were his arms and weed ,
would wear as crowns the clouds of skies ;
then rapture joyous and radiant
far above that of the mandan women around me .
to meekness .
as the fish that leaps from the river ,
surely i knew that by and by
then silk upon the earth was spread ,
then offer up your thanks to heaven
the milk - white peacocks slept ,
quickened of nature 's eye and ear ,
_ plures esse malos _ bias autumat ille prieneus ;
than smells in spring the elder tree .
was conscious of a something lacking , where
shall mark the mortal hour of hoary time ,
and south and north , let all be there
" _ find the value of b in the following equation : a square plus x
and pray , o father , let thy will be done !
fierce are albania 's children , yet they lack
per te quoniam genus omne animantum
be not astonish'd and scared , because there appears on a sudden
for a mary dwelt there ,
nay , why should i fear death , 274 .
in mirth and merriment ,
whether he pressed friendly / that hand as white as snow
but , as a few short hours or years revolve ,
against the prince , the people , and the name .
the mighty globes that rolled
while the great gates of heaven roll'd back one by one ,
and humblest ones by god himself are blest ,
and , taught by pain , through suffering 's fiercest fires ,
it occurs repeatedly .   and another poem , -- not to make
as meted out within the time of man ,
speak to you . "
of manhood to the scaffold led ,
when they come back again ! " . . .   look at the lake--
but the doom
¿ y quién consiente mi duelo ?
a third not more long - suffering than he should .
lives altogether nameless , whether good
examples of this kind are so contagious ,
nigh the poppy - droop of day .
and rise upon your cold white marble beds ;
flowed quietly away ;
thy heart 's unspoken pain he knows ,
in it -- but with the disadvantage that he does not let
one heart 's a rote , with music stored
wherefore , ye tones celestial , sweet and strong ,
house of the grave , what we do !
thence came they to bechlaren as on the spur they rode ;
hymnorum modulis dulce canunt melos ,
memory .
all our gentlemen - in - waiting ;
lowkande , locking , shutting , b. 441 .
when wine , he knew ,
fate is sugríva ’s thrall , and we
and tears be wiped from every eye .
of fleshly warfare , to behold the thrones
lest i should reel with the wine of you ,
it is another scene ! another self !
who said that i should ne'er win back
for such immeasurable woe appears ,
his sceptre , swaying it to neither side ,
of him who sat and gazed with sorrowing face ,
for the sake of the skill we may gain ,
arcite to the temple walked is
and their eyelashes crossed tightly ,
the home of the dead , of the friends who were dear ,
esteem them not so little ;
the young with rapture gazed on thee , and their hearts in
( nor being swallowed by whales between ) ,
he said , nor answer’d priam ’s warlike son ;
yon monument upreared to thee ;
and settled down , like humbler folks ,
yea , weeping at the bitterness
to see the eyes that read the world 's desires ,
up they rose with cry and clamor ,
why -- this earth is the planet for you , love , and me .
my soul i 'll pour into thee .
with soot —
disports itself amid the festival
those who in ancient times have feigned in song
nor wished the damsel any sound to hear ,
of a most wise and well - abused night
i his flesh , and mine is he ;
twine the white , white violet ,
pour chercher quelquechose for to lick ,
“ deep in a vale 's recess , of waters pure .
sche loketh and hire yhen caste
when the müne was shinin ' clearly .
beheld a figure standing there that made his hair arise
of god 's best gifts : but , oh , be sure ,
we are bound to beggary ; nor our own can call
many .
dire gnashings of the teeth , and horrid curses ,
der maire he pring de money ,
and the bold stars does hear ,
alas mad folys howe longe wyll ye procede
high on the summit of yon ' pyramid?--
ye woulde pray me come nere .
like those who battled not in vain
to bring down the feather'd game ;
invites me with the other to like toil .
for strife comes with manhood , and waking with day .
meridian evidence puts doubt to flight ;
behold the wretched ones , who left the needle ,
such sense within the slain !
which to discover we ride smiling , too .
each polish'd shaft with snow - white plumage wing ,
little brown bobby said " shoo ! shoo ! shoo ! "
as well ye know , one whole link of this chain :
quod calet halitus interior ,
a voice resistless and soft amorous arms ,
and we never had any peace with our treasure .
the subtle power of genius , which no mortal can describe ,
reigns o'er the fields ; the laborer sits within
and i suspect , when pains and troubles fall ,
m.a . , trinity college , cambridge , and to the masters and other
invisible grapples round the soul ,
and , as usual , large stones he was jerking ;
soul be one individual substance ) but only receiving these
and none can make afraid ;
but the musical refrain,--
and eldory home fer two
and yet,--and yet !   o lord , we humbly pray,--
" be happy , dear heart , and wait !
' mid that long sickness , and those hopes deferr'd ,
on a sun - beam , swift as a shooting star
patella nil debet foro .
white as an angel is the english child ,
to be in works a man , in heart a child .
go and fodder my syoetikki ,
you exclaimed,--"they intermix
a stone 's throw out on either hand
' had generous feeling warm'd thy sovereign 's heart ,
so human pleasures , frail and light ,
delivers into my hands before the city of ilius -- and of all
ring ye the bels , to make it weare away ,
the night is descending ;
so gnaw'd the viper the corroding file :
with eager step advanc'd , and deem'd the greeks
he lives among the snow and ice ;
but many admire it , the english pentameter ,
his feelings all were true ;
my true love hath my heart , and i have his .
for what are their follies but dreams ?   they have _ done _ nothing ,
he saw two ghostly figures rise ,
tears still are mine , and those i need not spare ;
without a sigh or tear , or ever these
and the sun , at each matutinal invasion ,
durst cause her stay , against her will , by force .
a comrade to my thought , thy ready brain
a crow that flies in heaven 's sweetest air .
which once again her master crucifies .
to be tried by fire an ' ground in de mill .
the thing that i implore . "
all who turn to it .   had this text divine
to soothe the fields to a sweet content .
story , and who , unfortunately , attempts to tell a
thou gavest norway in his power ,
what wind soever waft his will
the ear when for a moment comes surcease
steep ground and were nearing the city , they reached the
of ghostly thoughts , like phantom birds , would flit
he must have knelt and kissed her , in some sad
the empire great in which you shine
oblivion in lost angels can infuse
scarce knowing if we wish to go or stay ,
like that dear wood of yore , i wandered forth
tom van arden , my old friend ,
her third was feminine enough to annul
but the woman alone would gently moan ,
but knows not what to do , not what to say .
for , sure as morning came ,
cast on theyr hede , or tyll the stonys fle
be palpable , and proof apparent urge . "
hoped with his aid , his object he 'd complete--
labour by day and wake o ' nights ,
and freedom 's spirit guides the laboring storm ,
beyond the moor and the mountain crest
of wearying dust and stone
en estrecho recinto , en que se apoca
not much , i know , you prize
shall scale the august ancient heights and to old reverence bow ?
exsulat ; aeterni patet indulgentia ueris .
the burden that it always bore :
ye murmur ? blame yourselves alone !
i trace the lives such scenes enshrine ,
with which no foe can cope !
the cruel man stretched forth his murdering hand ,
where men are brave in heart and hand--
far i hear the steady drummer
these eyes may never see .
then slow he rose , mykenai 's king of men ,
where store of generous wheat but lately grew .
xliv . in piteous sort he tramples on the slain ;
do not weep .
old kiley stood and saw them go
through the park in the dark ,
goaded his steps , still stinging him in sleep ,
now stones roll and tumble ,
thou compensate the brief delay .   say then ,
when the lord beamont , who their armings knewe ,
baba thought she would faint , but there he err'd--
the woman can not be believed .
but think that his mind 's eye ,
the rapid , that o'erbears the boatmen 's toil ,
above alle erthli creatures
like in all else , as one egg to another .
and head the men of tipperary !
but first the landlord will i trace ;
but the great three , the host who led ,
yet , though i yearn to gaze on thee , i feel
from evil , mid the travail and change of life . "
i must have it all before night ,
bemused and blurred and pinkly lustrous , where
and on his breast the beamy splendour shone ,
ye congress men and men of weight ,
no farther seek his merits to disclose ,
a little boy a pair o ' skates to fit my boots soon found--
an angel lives on high ! "
within their throats ; couched , turn a song
- what thinks your friend , kind sir ?   we have escaped
redeeming worlds to be by bigots shaken ,
" if thou canst , not remember , call to mind
singin'-like , she turned ter go ,
his heart 's first love ; for her he prunes the vine ,
thy hair soft - lifted by the winnowing wind ;
as down the valley he did flee
but i was going to tell you about my wife .   now , nex ' monday 's a
cosas dichas por mujer
and of assured neutrality .
as the singer 's song out - circled ,
can kisse or touch without a blush ,
from under the haunted roof ,
i heard her low anguish ,
but dreamed alone of the day when your bud would unsheathe ,
when the tide goes out , how the breezes blow
to be the guardian of the ocean - tides ,
there bayberry and aster
well i know , sans writing 's cover ,
she ended , and appear'd on other thoughts
his coloure is of grene ;
and every flower - cup fills ;
yes--_comfort ye , my people , saith your god ? _
is he who makes his meal on others ' wit :
with the floods outstretched before her ,
and then i met a man , a different man
with so swift a sense of fun
then spake , " in us two now is manifest
in worms , as their equipment was carrying through the court ,
and he to us : " o souls , that hither come
and then with his lips set tight he entered .
and out of the second lattice
who on the bridge among the crags dost sit
as if attended on by time ) ,
die lotosblume ängstigt
ruskin 's sesame and lilies .
duper or duped , a well - bred man 's discreet ;
my dear weary little one ,
thurgh whiche envie is fyred ay .
black gushing forth , his blood was spilt .
had the nimble werbel / the goodly bishop found .
to see in times before us how a wise man thought ,
quick begins his incantations ,
those lines ethereal?--
pillowed soft upon the hay .
and read to man my grief . you see the war
among the rest a noted bruiser stood ,
who chariotest to their dark wintry bed
i had not looked , since not for a woman 's sake
the ill - timed efforts of officious love ;
by nilus head , inclos'd with shining rock ,
this is the wave .
conquer and come to thy goal ,
does not care for lover 's weeping !
for broken vow can such return be made
upon the warp , was woven , i began ,
and never to see the ghost of me
hath builded on the waste in former years
breathing their pæans till far away
making so sweet the air ,
so links more subtle and more fine
than his own wings , between so distant shores .
' course it 's blocked the bloomin ' gangway up again !
now think well , mother , before you say what i shall bring for you
sure sign of land,--aloft with ghastly shrieks ,
if on ill object bent , or through excess
and nations laid in blood . dread sacrifice
the forests galloped till they fell ,
long , long ago , in blurred and burdened years ,
the low graves are all grown over
you have not learnt it half :
operations of the mind , by which means the imagination can with
but lives a victim for thy vengeful sword ;
and absolon his gitern hath y - taken ,
' twas like the smell from charnel vaults ,
how fair is the skoodoowabskooksis ,
to his trade
as you 'd fly scylla , or charybdis shun ,
along thy banks , swift teith ! they ride ,
she thought , if fortune had but smiled--
  addison , spectator , no . 121 ; " to me instinct seems the immediate
the quick resources of a wily head ,
and it shall be my endeavour to reveal thee in my actions ,
step back with thee , and leave his troop to go . '
a cheerful spirit to the humble home ;
scenes , that too seldom human life has known
mayst thou unbrace thy corslet , nor lay by
up a tree and rob nests , like they _ ortent _ to do ,
do i linger ?   nay , be it so , then ! ... soul to soul ! "
somehow my soul seems suddenly free
my soul , so light a joy
you are nancy , that old nancy ;
in a heart that is almost to madness wrought ,
more like a woman than a man with hands
the innocent brightness of a new - born day
thus up the margin of the lake ,
old floyd ireson , for his hard heart ,
to do obeisance to their lord .
" fye na , fye na , " said may margaret ,
with bluer sky and brighter light ;
the pretty soul , then left her and despised ?
then he eyes th ' british flag ; says : " god bless you , you old rag !
" if so you are , then so you make yourself
upon the vices to procede
las mansas ovejuelas ordeñadas
that ever won fair fame in fight
this message had been brought by mortal man ,
and little tom the mother 's boy .
_ sada - ko _           " the chaste . "
gunther and gernot , / --well known to me they long have been .
seest thou the eastern dawn ,
men in kindly ambition contend ;
in which thy strength will fade away .
in the name of the mighty god !
an innocent outcast from her wasted lands ,
three hundred temples , each a stately fane .
aspiciam nullos hodierna luce dolentis :
pan etiam arcadia dicat se iudice victum(265 ) .
waved to our passing ;
as thy old cloven foot ;
or jest a cheerful sinner ,
and now the roses smile at us and nod along the way ;
who has the devil in his trap
and her firelight smiles from her window there ,
this clew , however , to their flight ,
thence , driven by the fly , you came
the work of god 's perfection ; yet invent
till , great enough for any commerce grown ,
the infernal powers , in one day to have marr'd
and look where , by and by ,
men looking down from some sheer dizzy steep
banquet of paystreak bacon ! moment of joy divine ,
three roses , wan as moonlight , and weighed down
the rest stood trembling , struck with awe divine ;
fair insect ! that , with thread - like legs spread out ,
accordingly . leaving out the starting note in both tunes , has , i
horror , peril on our way !
the early note of wakeful chanticleer .
but fairer is my mary .
take of these the one that pleases . "
upon the eve of earthly severance ;
and they 're not at all sweet -- but look at their pranks :
and no meruayle for it is nat greatly worne
pain a - plenty . -- ' twas proof of this ,
enough of chilly droppings for her bowl ;
when in the garden bare and brown
you will make a new syriac grammar ,
the young men they admire him ,
the silver shines upon their underside .
and lost in the pit , toss the angels that fell .
kai desma ; laous alla moiras
he brought us keys to paradise ,
the lads and the lasses were deeing in dizzins ,
" i 'll live for my country , not on her "
take rose - leaf and vine - leaf and bay - leaf
he thinks himself arrived : the purple grapes ,
thus took he purpos loves craft to suwe ,
sufficient probability , are meant the seven capital sins , by the
and happy moments fled :
every day the starving poor
al lujo necesita ,
the cypress high among the trees ,
her knitting twisting oer her thumb ,
with roses they will strew the way ,
and from a high window -- a square of black velvet--
falling to watch , and plays its part in turn and turn about .
at law he shook his fist .
he snatches dat nut , to appear in de book .
still keeping to the rippling waves her horse ,
who shall say what thoughts and visions
the dove flies on ! in lonely flight
not always doth the busiest soul best serve him ,
the shield in charge gave hagen / thence away to bear .
is she , alas , to the daughters ? and for those who have no
other , in the gray surtout and cocked hat , is napoleon
wha 'll buy caller herrin ' , vol . i , 195 .
oh , when shall i dance on the daisy - white mead ,
golden the good - wife 's butter ,
how leo and his sire were overlaid ,
the lesson i so lately taught ?
relieve my languish , and restore the light ;
if thou must love me , let it be for nought
his parents went back with him joyfully ,
“ our tears the impious mob deride , and press
raise a wild cry as if their throats were cut
that , too , seemed complete , but a gentleman beckoned
but a song that falls unheard
thou dost float and run ;
sad true lover never find my grave ,
and , for his maker 's image sake , exempt ?
so rang the harps in babylon --
the earth is enough and the air is enough
and amid it like a sunset is the hectic plague - spot burning ,
fresh blows the early breeze , our sail is full ;
with fires on the hills for gamelbar !
where the waggons in the mist rumble dimly on
and towering o'er her , prostrate as she lies ,
the king of men , by coön in the field
the very light of memory was dim .
the harping of mortals !
and on your frosted panes the pallid moon
pollux . her inquiry is a natural one , and her self - reproach
annals be lost , and nothing have remained
as a mason all alone
presager of that later note ,
i _ would _ not , _ could _ not look , lest i should see
for daily with my growing store
nobody comes to his porch at night and sits in that extra chair
can never mold , thy caviare is blest ,
the trackless forests of mexico
is daunted and slinks sulkily off -- even so did menelaus son of
this one thing i can say : i am content
i know the rivers , lakes , and seas ,
i gladly gave my life for yours .
the master work , and catch
what saddens me so as i hang about thy neck ?
a woman on the shelving , wet , black rock ,
long as there are violets ,
down to the lake , and wandered on the beach ,
they show the gladness of their looks
dashed his brains from forth his head ,
that bitter strife .   then thetis sable - stoled
came one by one the seasons , meetly drest .
whom thaumas ' child from rosy mouth in suchwise doth bespeak :
as oilers and coal - heavers ?
many of these ballads were addressed in letters .
an endless throng of people came and jostled together .   the road
beneath the lids of eastern eyes ;
κέαται κόπῳ δαμέντα ,
for she only shook her little head and said it was no use .
would in the still small circle of a lamp
in this quiet resting place ;
i 'd ask no king for his heavy crown ,
who , while they move , their maker praise ,
her shrines forgotten and her feasts of mirth ,
of his imperiall bountie with expences :
buy'st travel at the lowest price .
  therefore stoop , and curl not thy snout . he yet can restore
what if a hundred years ago
wherefore should his fight the more be bold .
" and quarries upon quarries heapt and hurled ,
booth , edwin : lincoln discusses his _ hamlet _ , xvii - xix .
through the twelve tribes , to rule by laws ordaind :
for pleasure , excitement .   wild impulses , new
" not all the mysteries that in us lie--
is -- the unlit lamp and the ungirt loin ,
the second of the ormaleis composed ,
a horse and arms for guerdon ; choose the best . '
at thy will the grave will open ,
quick the wicked hostess , louhi ,
in council like a god ; but he had sought ,
but with unequal anguish , wearied all ,
may overtake you . therefore i shall have no ease until i have
" is there no respite ? no release ?
making of those for war ,
there came a big spider
and now it 's " get the doolies , " an ' now the captain 's gone ;
loud murmurs fill the skies -- swift vengeance all
incubation the weather remains perfectly calm , whence the
o son of man , rejoice :
his arrogance provoked his countrymen to such a pitch of fury
and still later , when the autumn
whan this pourpos was wist and knowe
shine with his fair example , and though small
by the side of king olaf he stands .
ctesippus , born in samos ; base of mind
and win back home , to gladden parents eyes ,
arne , the daughter of æolus , whom neptune seduced under the form
myself with yesterday 's sev'n thousand years .
ko'ko - ko'ho , the owl .
chestnuts in the ashes ,
" o my dearest brother tiera ,
and he , the once wild ocean storming sky ,
that shall blaze up again with growing speed ,
turned to his friends and said : " the jig is up .
he doffed his wig and his long white beard ;
all seem to gaze at me
dark , in the realm and shades of death ,
had ony power to speak !
and the weird volume on its brazen stand .
the birds of all the forest
shall find their grave - clothes folded ? what clear eyes
buried the mastodon . the warring tribes
buy braw troggin ,
the waves will not answer you ; neither shall i.
warm with the winter - sun , of burnish'd green
no master spirit , no determined road ;
lovers of argument , averse to sense !
have left the lodge and gone from sight .
the wrath of the rain !
and the fire in our hearts of a star .
how often underneath the sun ,
the hawser swung , the grinding helm at rest ;
when my beautiful charmer renews her sweet strain .
hospitality , who will one day destroy your city ; you stole my
marble fountains , yellowed with much water .
that they who writ , who march'd , who fought
one hasty orison , whirled me away
am given to understand . i presume , that , being necessarily
to you and all mankind .
  pope 's correspondence , vol . i. p. 398 .
when yet th ' unborn shall say , lo , where she lies !
as drear and barren as the glooms of death ,
just for the christ'ning party , for the treat ,
" magic bridegroom of wainola ,
she died , and left to me
send not by our footman joe .
elsewhere ill - join'd or found apart ,
symphonious of ten thousand harpes that tun'd
had not the monarch quickly stopt the fray .
our lives may be as fierce and free
the energies that labour for this place ,
shall i ever feel again ?
the trunks to prop his roof , where he may dwell
' now tell us what ' twas all about , '
the fynd saw , he wase ny mate ,
bring here the ancient volume ;
that appal the murderer 's sight ,
a something wild and strange and true:--
with the dread sense of things which shall be done ,
" peter did nothing by halves , but everything with the
a subtle serpent then has love become .
appears it at this edge ? "   he straight replied :
whose every wish is all fulfilled ?
or a struggle there 'd been
he did both laugh and wince .
when fierce temptation , seconded within
on my lord bishop 's head , his grace of malta .
for oft i read within my nook
cantos entona ,
and to the aged the youth , that in the eternal progression
fieldwards i gazed throughout next day ;
_ dight _ , to wipe , to clean corn from chaff .
is my poor bet , my piebald talking mare ,
golden and fierce . she knew the god sans ruth ,
poor fire , near out , one stirs to make it flare!--
in a straight line spreads her destruction wide ,
the martyr , the wan acolyte ,
at cock - crow , on a starlit winter 's morn ,
nor shear the fleeces even , gnawed through and through
my study shall be tragic thoughts sad fancy to delight ,
the world had all one nose .
and thine the stars , revealing one by one ,
leaden brains tend to the vapid .
from whence my voice thou hear'st ; more thanks to her .
as e'en colours scarce can draw them .
let the few years of earth 's existence pass ,
all the toughness of the cedar ,
and , upon her snowy breast ,
they only answered " little liar ! "
and she wrang her hands full sore :
send pallas back , whom death 's relentless doom
to his gloomy lodge of sandstone .
that bids defiance to the united powers
if those designs abortive prove
as chasms roar with devils ' glee .
the hammers of heaven making the hills ,
that wol noght auntre forto winne .
for comfort just designed .
to the cell of hagan eagerly she went ;
fain to be broken by love . yet unto the last i endeavored
in the picture story - books .
to war 's red - stained field they came .
thy hopeless charnels deep ,
of vegetable gold ; and next to life ,
so year by year the music rolled afar ,
ye wolden for noght elles lete ,
in hollow tones was pealing ,
that something quickens in the hearts of men ,
and let me get back to the comfort
' twixt thee and us ordained to stand , -
his labour to fashion and burnish it .
i only have thee , hold thee , break thee ! ' "
sweet sixteen is shy and cold ,
up in the morning early
and pallid forms , and murders of the night ,
o tell me what sound ,
a plenteous crop of rising corn to yield ;
varying their verdure to the gale ,
the bottles twain behind his back were shattered at a blow .
prepared again their strength to try ,
one after life in far - away london and paris
marriage portions . ]
burns ’s centenary .
' tis wickednesse thou wouldst haue me c[=o]fesse .
like songs of the dear olden time ;
to conquer brutes the world should blush to own ;
so hush,--i will give you this leaf to keep :
for a charm of powerful trouble ;
great weapon of the sons of air .
the good man would repine ; would suffer joys ,
he stamps his mark upon my brow .
by too severe a fate
with avaricious greed , from all beside .
mighty already was the column vair ,
and wake as it crumbles to dust !
they had for their bridal bed alone ,
wonder not if , while every scene
and grasp tremblingly ,
w{i}t{h}-outen maskle oþ{er } mote as margerye p{er}le .
bird , to give the.--to treat with derision .
lives , of that bad man forsaken -- hard it is to say , she lives !
no more might be my sorrow / than for this hero 's life .
poor imp of the greensward , god trumpets me clear in thy call ;
but what around looked dusk and dim
what are these ills which trouble air?--
forever vanishing beyond
" can saturn 's issue , and heav'n 's other heir ,
is lovely yet ;
a codfish quintal or a factory bale ,
soul ! they say a jasmine produces the flowers of the
" yes , my race would hasten onward ,
the king 's great love for vashti !
when children are happy and playing alone .
but never succeed in being weavers .
pleiad its name , and robin ,
and teach his feet a measure ,
i made up my mind to try the spec ,
many and mighty things he did
that leads unto thy sacred street .
" o thou blacksmith , ilmarinen ,
where they of phrygia , mysia , lydia dwelled ,
the wilderness shall blossom as the rose .
glows with the autumnal or the summer ray ,
and silver waters wide ,
maeve walked , yet with slow footfall being old ,
of what that paynim had in paris wrought ,
a thunderbolt he was , you would have said ,
lovers , lulled in sunny bowers ,
where my thoughts fly back to be
of the body and the spirit ;
_ you may perhaps divine _ !
those who go following ghosts that ever flee
cuius ut accensae dryades candore puellae
but for short space ; for small is the offence
coiled around its wings and neck .
in those days the evil spirits ,
surely ' tis june
bring my suit of magic colors ,
for the winds that awakened the stars
full many .
wise " if " and " perhaps!"--precious salve for our wounds ,
good - morrow , my masters all !
our first standing toast we to golfing assign ,
melancholy this dawn ,
_ 84 . ' { phainetai moi kenos isos theoisin } ' _
ah , what shall we lose ?
that insult deep we deeply will requite .
" i do n't . i wish i did . "
and the wayward violets ;
to hyer matter , like as these children do ,
their offering to the union side .
oh the fine old english tory times ;
in civil conflict met on bosworth field ,
by the great sea which laves the gascon shore ,
like flower - leaves in a previous volume stored ,
last from among the heroes one came near ,
saves himself by fleetly fleeing ,
whose restless strength had swayed her fragile form .
too much _ negligence _ is _ sloth _ ;
smokers who freely mix
the french with glittering lance , and there you might
and all the world is wild and strange ;
on the curving snow - capped sea - coast ,
louring no more defiance ! but fear - smote
and saw how england 's liberties
he at the shield had aimed , but smote not fair
wherof min hope mihte arise ,
the while the conduits of my kine
with generous joy : then menelaus rose ;
" either thy words , " said he , " deceive ; or else
' fore damask roses .
ef you 'll jest treat him as you ort .
to lean on it in his descent to hell .
the lightning fell with never a jag ,
then hector seized the stern of a brave bark
hurled the pine - cones down upon him ,
begin , good king , thine empire now .
no worldling reach ,
a tinker , with a cart and a poor , ill - fed beast harnessed to it ,
the other . he will thus share like honour with myself . "
for , as the vessel left the cymrian haven ,
from whence to move , and turn'd the left aside .
chronicles of italy tell us little of that rinaldo d'este who
crown of her , young vancouver ; crest of her , old quebec ;
as annual tribute . much they own
welcoming in fame some special veteran , hero ,
the gold from thy finger fair and fine ,
yet doubt not , noble folker , i 'll bear this message fain
" woman , where is thy husband?"--called unto me ,
god at the last , reluctant , made the sun .
nos tamen interea tenerum mactabimus haedum
and the frogs in frenzied chorus from the creek .
i quaff the luscious tankard unrestrain'd ,
steel of the finest , bright and blue ;
come , long - sought !
his long rambles by the shore
one april , when the warm days first began .
however , of diana as the goddess of the moon , was , most probably ,
now i being last of the blunderhead race ,
i must fulfil my purpose .
oh , let me guide his steps victorious ,
and horsemen bold and sudden in fight .
are drawing a long breath to shout " hurray ! "
so both himself and us to glorify :
they sauntered on at just their former rate
to discern weeds , and judge of wholesome food ,
did , if you had not given me such timely information . advise me
intelligent of my distress
goes the kitchen clock .
dark shadow on the freezing pane ,
a cold and not too cleanly manger ?
the self - same cherub - faces which emboss
no longer now the seasons wear
he lies in the laurels , he runs on the grass ,
as a man would talk to a man .
his eyes o'erstretch the far unmeasured plains
dismiss , sweet dame , dismiss thy fear ;
as strongholds and asylums for themselves ,
or a furrow of brown where the earthworks run
and after it all,--the play and the sleep
her flight , and freedom in a thousand lands :
unto the fields and flowers this flesh i found so fair
know me for agamemnon , atreus ' son ,
a harsher truth might teach
toward that one future , whose footsteps we hear ;
let us go forth into the field ,
hik - tee - dik ! billy and buddy !
my bray ye may not alter nor mistake
it past all former wo nt .   and , as by sense
in a tumultuous privacy of storm .
i think ye are very weel aff
unwares before the altar - horns ; nor of the love did reck
( such as ahmad al - maidani , the great collector of proverbs , who
the lilt of the tune .
desert these shrivel'd cheeks .   so from the place ,
the wind is passing by .
though she bends him , she obeys him ,
and golden calm , as slow she wheels through space ,
but , having ' scaped temptation 's shelf ,
we will swing the rope for baby dear ,
their various liv'ries , by the summer dress'd ,
and i saw my stout galloper roland at last ,
may peace go with him .
he cometh and goeth on silent feet ,
supplied , and let them shake unwound ;
and those strange features spy ,
hanc tenui folio purpura rubra notat ,
of the deep and boundless blue - sea .
peut - être -- et mort
enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it -- and his work is
free to wander far away ,
nor fully ripen'd in the flame of love ,
i 'll put you out of my mind and forget for ever
the fairest of them all ; awhile she gazed
o fond anxiety of mortal men !
forsoken , he drawth in ayein :
when ance life 's day draws near the gloamin ' ,
little faith were the angels keeping
then , dying is no dangerous thing ;
i am white man .
in yon sweet living lands of art ,
earth ; but were i to pull at it myself i should draw you up with
their hearts ; the stars , their nuptial torches , shed
for shame leave this wicked employment ,
but she maun seek hersel ' !
heard them chattering like the magpies ,
ere hushed were the angels ' notes of praise
from curiosity doth wisdom flow :
to him thus hector with reproachful words ;
chasing the wild deer , and following the roe--
yet , no -- not words , for they
the narrator 's seat of honour .
and the shouting of the foes .
a ferlie he spied wi ' his ee ;
what can it then avail though yet we feel
held to her hands , her heart with wrath o'erran :
' a sort of military peculation ,
that kānu is so cunning .
patiently , fervently wrought for her ,
and steddy hold what ever must be staid ;
his journey 's end and our beginning woe .
than human blood and bone !
that ever any one longed to kiss ,
of the night and dawn , the daughter ,
' till fam'd breadalbane opens to my view.--
which god hath blest anew ,
how glad am i to hurry swiftly back
god 's breath , which e'en , despite of me , will creep
and get me gifts , " she said .
imbrius remains the fierce ajaces ’ prize .
as those that sparkle here ?
himself .
its flowering crest impearled and orient .
why , what is there in all god 's plan
internis velit inplicare venis ,
now westward borne , and now toward the bears ;
so eager to pass o'er , as i discern
poetical existence ?   if this is not sufficient to denominate his
and of our well - beloved .   and let this
i gave him all that he required from me .
by gazing on its own exceeding light ,
the rolling river , the morning bird ;
almost in front , a river calmly flowed ;
" rollànd , companion , hearken ! soon , methinks ,
.       .       .
that paled into gray when you parted from me .
o moon ! whose golden sickle 's gone ;
glared like ishkoodah , the comet ,
and the young chief spoke , and answered ,
and i , " if a new law take not from thee memory or practice of the
and the naked red lightning thrust at the smouldering
my hands were pressed to , vanished suddenly .
he seemed to see christine ,
break ’ neath the beetling cliffs with muffled roar .
to seek the welcome downy ,
lopp’d the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel )
a young man will be wiser by and by ;
yet am willing to hope you 're too learnedly read
i ' m coming hame to thee , mary ,
( such as i to think of fame ! )
to camp thare ' fore game vam - moosd .
ye have slept on the ground before ,
caught , as i passed , a white hand 's gleam--
crimson mane , and tail , and foretop ,
and down the awful passes of the sky
droop like roses and wither away .
how provident he is , how farr from thought
or whether thou , to our moist vows denied ,
if you have seen all this and more ,
where the beautiful shadows sway ;
the sunny hue of health
unchanged in the unchanging sun ,
no welcome at the door ?
if i were sure they should endure ;
the lore of human nature in thee , writ
mean follower , like him with honest love
torches in their hands , and when they had made the bed they came
right loud the bugle 's hallali elate
where mars and pallas strive to make their glory most to stand !
in the conflict . the only method to come off victorious , is by
that it has always seemed to us
of the hurt of the colour of blood for ever .
you stand as brothers side by side .
an ' for all ' is dirty ' ide
who hath not loiter'd in a green church - yard ,
from the sunny climes of france ,
that paled or flushed his olive cheeks and brow .
you even placed your country
the muses have left all the vales of the south ,
do nothing rash .
all the pale , cruel , beautiful , passionless power
if all be true that i do think ,
and fresh from the kisses of death ;
and now , praise god , it 's over , and he seems to breathe again
thy servant ’s fitful negligence .
at hand . ' tis death for thee , and worse than death-- "
around one parent knee .
which thurgh beheste hath overcome
the son of raghu ’s stay would be :
hath set the prairie round in flame ;
and each hid radiance there ,
there , with dark - smouldering eyes and naked throats ,
tú que en acento de desdén profundo
our guests were few , yet cared we not ,
working long upon his vessel ,
" this requires some little reflection .
what the anvil ? what dread grasp
and clustering spangles lodge and shine
on the bridge , the boldest      of the band of men .
thy shores i tread with joyous measure ,
“ that touch , thou impious king , shall be
holding wonder like a cup .
a frown upon the atmosphere ,
of sea , but only sand and death ,
intent beyond the ausonian bounds to flee ,
and if against so fierce a cavalier ,
my life has been approved ,
that i was false , and could deceive :
because they 're late to rise .
and willingly i 'll do it , " / spake the fair and winsome maid .
a portal , bolted fast :
" what 's the devil 's harvest to - day ? " he cried ;
the love i prayed might die to loveless scorn
melodious verbal collocations ,
the joy is ours , but all its own the sadness .
( angels ) courage , shepherds , courage !
youkahainen , sad , but wiser ,
who still regretted that he did not rhyme .
under one form of government rather than another , ' he told that
thy soft , familiar dashings , and is soothed ,
outward sunshine , inward joy .
and unrich house , and nought he knew of mighty men 's abode ,
has a second moon arisen ,
a sterner fire to feed:--
they had been since many a year .
the fiery foliage , where its brand
with that bloodhound , remorsefulness , forever at his heels .
then biting from out the hedge a nice cane ,
or shall i stay at hame ?
and when their statues are placed on high ,
and thence would wend his ways to seek arcadia 's chilly place .
that sacred way ?
to whom , for christ , the world is loss ;
frail , fanciful , and fair
of his pulsating aureole ;
deterred not from achieving what might lead
i turn and look another way ,
so moses stood on pisgah 's heights alone ,
pierced my heart , my breast 's weak fortress won ,
so great was thy power , elessde .
by what road shall i find the better end ?
and appears like an immense cone , or sugar loaf , rising
' i m ' oo was charged with things ' e never did .
sweet love of loveless men !
of the white fire , heaped high by blinded stars ,
you and i , dear , will go with softer steps
as mariners becalmed through vapors drift ,
smarting with the insult ,
bishop of limerick , bermingham lord athenry , st . lawrence lord
to numb the sense of dearth , which , should sin haste it ,
on earth and the immeasurable sea .
granada by its winding stream ,
as fast as we can flee ,
if not , come lend an ear ,
he is a friend of mine , with whom it will agree ,
now , like that struggling beam , receding fast ,
and that was ate mydnyht tyde .
" what!--our hoar old houses ,
a high brick wall ,
old planets fade , new stars shall dimly burn ,
ghost - like o'er her features pale .
itself , and show'd a feverish disposition ;
so tender , and true , and sweet ,
teacher of teachers !   priest of priests ! from thee
see , see , my captain , see what they have done !
the sea - serpent coils , all painted in oils ,
then , as you pass , let mountains homage pay
to be our intimates ,
trailed across by moving shadows ,
silence below .
donatura cycni , si libeat , sonum ,
saint filomena bore .
that in his struggle throws the thyrsus down ,
that now not all the houses left in town
the sailor - boy must go ;
so to the queen the word came in
when lisbon 's towers before the lusian fell ,
comes a sound of eloquence
all trembling kiss'd .   the book and writer both
and as he speaks the tears descend in dew .
_ and copy their proud steady gaze . _
and sorrow looks into her face . . .
ther cam neptunus in the weie ,
her promise half fulfilled .
where i the rarest things have seen ;
twice he leaped , and lo ! above him
i 'll give thee a corollary still in grace ,
for bissiness in aberdene .
if he had warred on him with equal chance ;
we have loved your burgs , your pines ' green moan ,
contained impious doctrines against the holy trinity , and other
would my mother now were living ,
and he summons his three hundred workmen .
' twas an eve of fair midsummer when the lords of rhineland came
and then he 's music in the night ,
but often , in the din of strife ,
and when thou holdest , throned again ,
the row of crests and shields and banners
showers triple light , and scorches even the kiss
remorse , the worm , can never die .
gave the first feast of mondamin ,
soon on tolbiac 's bloody field the king
or try the wicked town of ayr ,
so that the war - worn hosts in europe 's maze ,
and went hym on his way ;
if you still doubt me , listen while i prove
o ráma , to our prayer attend .
some terror turned me to look back :
luckless wight ! his piteous sobs
of generous aid given , with that noiseless art
" away , away ! in our blossoming bowers ,
upon her parents . this she had begun
had broken out ; but by behest of zeus
somtime in chambre , somtime in halle ,
but in the desolate hour of midnight , when
in ages past away :
seems murdered and all beauty wrong .
look'd fit to run for new south wales .
" and chose their priest , ere we can cast off sloth : "
came back , and i did not remember .
and ranko writes -- milica weaves .
the cause of the son of atreus . love him so well , and you may
that he should wear her favour at the tilt .
and i listen until i hear
or failing , smiles in exile or in chains ,
the evening shades are falling,--
the fellow we swear by is mercury ,
besides , when i this point concluded thus ,
his wisdom rules them , and his pow'r defends .
and all the songs of little birds
as , home - returning , less remote they lodge ,
as the unfathomed seas , where lost worlds sleep
into the world that rejoices --
are of mixed substance having in themselves
on the bosom of a mountain stream .
she next the stately bull implored ;
ye are welcome to vs as ye were before
to drive down bravely the juice of malt .
and yajnakopa whose delight
justice must take its course .
now , done with the science of blisses ,
stretched as now beneath the sun ?
at all times in a new year 's dress .
alas , my boy!"--his voice is heard no more ,
as indra ’s call lord vishṇu brings .
who leave thy heav'n - topt hills behind !
he has not learned to despise the dust , and to hanker after gold .
before our gate ; and the slow silent night
that som were hyndred by couetyse & slougthe
made rival with the air ,
where the twin stars , lights of this lower sphere ,
the graceful sorrows of some languid dame ,
upon the naked ash - tree top
nec tam virgineo fax tua flore tremit .
down below !
then first he recognized the ethereal guest ;
the armoury where many a spear had stood ,
the glorious girls of new york .
weeping with pain , her fair skin soil'd with blood .
and leap'st against thy chain .   sweet lady , how
for sun and the tide of fortune ,
came on the scene of that last stern fight ,
joy peoples her pavilion from the dead .
and live with beauty though it be not long ,
but thou speakest unto me
skill'd to pronounce what noblest thoughts inspire ,
sickens and sinks within me when i think
of poets , by poets -- as the name is a poet 's , too .
that gladly he may forward us aloft .
the truth concerning it ? but god knows how they lie , and may he
the sympathies that tremble there .
" send but a song oversea for us ,
arjuna , and the twin - born brethren next ,
be changed for any light or transient cause :
death reached out three crooked claws
maiden ! hast thou a thimble in thy gear ?
the volcano of the sun
is but a quiet watershed
thy office show ,
can comfort care , or sooth the heart :
but like a weed in the long wash , i too
and ( when one beats the man to his last hold )
" not mount as high ; " we scarce can sink as low :
be faithful to yourself , and the magic flower will never fade . "
have no accepted lover :
maiden or boy ?
into the centre of the ring they stepp'd :
by service long to purchase their good will ;
to the melancholy north - land ,
it is , to know that you will understand . _
a hundred miles or more ,
to disturb such a prodigy 's marvellous reign .
for feare of afterclaps , for to prevent :
shall now my joyful temples bind :
the young spirit of freedom shall shelter their grave
fell into sorrow from felicity ,
describes and prints it , that the world may know
and coming to the present , paused and blush'd ;
to brightness again .
nor excellent stores , nor landed on wharves from the ships ,
ancient of days here sits , as at the first ,
then sowther a ' in deep debauches ;
to sigh for ribands if thou art so silly ,
and a ' my nightly dream ,
my merry son , come tell me hither ?
another ?   what poet could have composed it but one who himself
" these knights , i ween , too timid / are ' gainst us to stand .
“ and often have i noted , when the tears
now in this mater what shold i lenger dwelle
" a boy 's will is the wind 's will ,
to the wide world and all her fading sweets ;
it did through all the mighty poets roul ,
swifter than my feet .
let some one else lock up the pearly
alone ; and somewhere out of bethany ,
a fitting a despair .
the lights of simla town ,
but that , too , passed away .
which wrong'd by cruelty or pride ,
luctibus in tantis hic vester risus inepti ,
within her heart , until she tossed
neither have been stored with plunder .
an hour they sat in council ,
an ' unco sonsie .
he rose from the line of the breakers that belch upon the
the true and earnest will ,
while fairy troops descend ,
were just so much greek ;
tracking his steps along the slender path
bytwene two mylstons theyr legges puttes to grynde
honestly your living get ,
with that a bitter smile well might you see
sapho , i will chuse to go
they were , and they are to be ,
for the velvet sponge and the glossy pearl ,
all coiled to spring at you and strike you dead ?
who dies in youth and vigour , dies the best ,
in effect as well as show ;
on leaving the gardens , the party were seated
or not to take a jump into the fire ?
when lovers part in pain ,
and stopt with menace this or that who fled ,
have stiffen'd in rebellion , and so long
delight or to instruct;--and he will therefore be disposed to
to the joint nations , equitable laws .
adds lustre to a crown , gives weight to sense ,
but said ; " the prayer which ye have heard ,
the snowbird mendicant
for even then there came that sterner voice ,
nor cranks experiment ;
sleep not!--thine image wakes for aye
and now all joyfully he brings
that like a torrent floods thy soul ,
an ' they call us her majesty 's engineers ,
" lo , i am with you alway,"--watch and pray .
whom weeping blinds , best reader here appears .
he would marry miss davis at once in her stead .
young micon offers : if his luck but hold ,
the cup of my heart filled i with love ;
remember how the creature feels ;
the serpent train .   against her nought avails
the parrot learned to call me " fool ! "
of joy , and in thy right hand endless bliss .
ravished from her , did many a day deplore ;
the sound of his dear native tongue
defer discussing the heroic funeral - rites till the twenty - third
they should have been secure against corruption .
i shape mine answer , for his ear intended ,
not yet , my soul , these friendly fields desert
duty stood like an angel in my path ,
they who neglect and scorn , shall never taste ;
now what would you do ? i arst you .
give true hearts but earth and sky ,
here in her woe came marie antoinette ,
" aeneas , prince and counsellor of troy ,
perjured , false , treacherous love !
he was not at the head of the fishermen
" i 'll go and tell my lady , " said gary there in place ,
that , as he led the example of mutilating himself , all her other
into a country where ' t is half a fashion ,
her robe of green is wearing ;
tumultuous spake he , rage his utterance ;
' us knows not , dreams not ,
your accent , like st . peter 's , would betray you ,
sad on thy lonely heart ,
thy tender soul , thy love of truth ,
for there behooves him to set up the standard of her grace :
what manner of woman are you ,
when all this silly dream is finished here ,
who challenged each one pausing ere he passed ,
the snares keen appetite and passion spread
and all the beauteous joy seems made
and digging here , a prosp'rous omen found :
to which responsive answered all the carols .
so that weird shadows jigged athwart the gloom .
even so we sang for him.--but o , the tale is true !
and there extolled achilles ' godlike son
behold the calm steer drinking in the stream ,
mark christ our king . he knows war , served this soldiering
ne nimium simus stultorum more molesti ,
seeme like a forrest bearing her proud head
acariciada de su luz , concibes !
which borrow'd from this holy fire of love ,
low curtsey'd , and away she went .
and deeply indebted humble servant ,
the lofty - gated thebes ; he slew indeed ,
from yarrow braes , and banks of tweed ,
frankly avowed his bold enslaving plan
o proudest heart that broke for misery !
malaja and karúsha lay ,
in my parents ' hot tears ;
thy joy , for all my pain would soon atone ;
see at his feet some little plan or chart ,
sam has his tragic background , weird and wild
doomed to an end that is evil ,
the name you cried beside the tumbling sea ? "
house of her wedded lord continually till his coming . '
blacken , flake , and twist ,
to leave me thus twixt life and death in doubt ?
and heroes of the mighty slog !
hollyhocks bend all tattered and torn ,
but the sound she heard not ,
to measure dull contentment therewithal ,
the vanquished oft are victors when the stubborn game is o'er ;
as midst live men a ghost condemned to seek
one only passion has he , it would seem--
as he drew the belt of wampum
hey , my kitten , my kitten ,
a science .   what wert thou to him that from ocean
when the _ spring of life _ is past .
" who would with aching head and toiling arms
one night came straggling soldiers , with their load
whence i : " thou peradventure marvellest ,
while taste with pleasure bends his eye surprised
where king latinus had as then his high - built herd - houses .
’ twas she brought much mishap to pass ;
hither the armies went , and chanted shrill ,
and boast affliction 's pangs subdued
as it was couth in sondri londes ,
þe lombeȝ nome , hys fadereȝ also .
reflected shines the eternal light of truth ,
so merival read over many times
and its true life is in its sphere of thought .
ni cura si encarama
this native land of mine .
as those men hold who feign the moon to be
but lat my petticoat be ;
popping up near to break the vision ?
confirm'd the cure ; and from the delphic dome
finned and fair ,
loose in the wind waved their banners light ,
you sin , and you suffer , and we , too , find sorrow ,
these the words the maiden utters :
of making better tune though they have talents rare .
sought at such a price ,
our clifford was a happy youth ,
and faint away in the silence
and oh , the swelling joy of it , the joy that there will be
honours he had brought away ;
men , women , children , all so gay ,
without reproach or fear ;
i 've got to go , got to go .
when cytherea , all in love forlorn ,
a very pale young man into position .
his force already , when he chased me down
from off whose noble forehead , and round whose shoulders brave ,
there fared a mother driven forth
how cool thy note sounds ; how thy wings of shimmer
since , when he 's startled from his sleep , a man
and to his dogs the mangled carcase giv'n ? "
whose board is richly spread:--
cleared he the gate of the world , huge and amazing !
asham'd , and shrunk from the abstracted ken
how fiercely the lorn strangers themselves defended there !
on the pitiful plots of their foes with a frown .
round thy neck a beaded necklace ,
a treasure of unwinnowed grain ,
he ; and the humor took them till the birds ,
with eyelids twitching to tears and with eyes grown tender
no more of our ' ard - earned wage we 'll spend
here in this happy dell . "
( though lately feasted high at albion 's cost , )
shadows !   i do n't see ;
dancin ' all erbout .
which somehow should undo him , after all !
as his inferior flame
" ho ! anand rao nimbalkhur , ride !   get aid of mulhar rao !
and sons of vikings , exiled from your throne .
how twice ten years from shore to shore he roams :
as we cast our cares to windward and our anchor to the lee ;
he is exampler , loode - ster , and guye ;
for it behoves thee to weep by another sword . "
thou wisdom with the glance of fire ,
maple , the red and sugar , 6 ;
the time will ne'er be gane ;
into the world to watch and wait and pray
i shone with something of her grace ,
a future moral height foreshadowing .
i find a magic bark ;
_ to london , when pa wired , " stop " _
he sipped no " olden tom , " or " ruin blue , "
her gesture , motion and her smiles
and one beholds the faces that he sighs
have lost that cheer and charm of earth 's past prime :
a strange deep broken voice , whispering love
baked a biscuit for the herdsman ,
thou art past the tyrant 's stroke ;
that is included in the poem . it would have been impossible to
i 've got the wrong ear by the sow ?
across the flood shall make its way . ”
or wilt thou , horror ! haunt the villain 's breast ,
o'er the heather .
of all her charms . he knew that she was chaste ,
till the shepherds look behind .
then commanding to all women
and finds her name is death ; still doth the fair
and he will smile , that children 's tongue
in his white face the joy of life
i crouched in a thicket of rush and sedge
there 's nae luck at a ' ;
its liberty,--
thus did he speak , and his words set them all a weeping .   helen
" here is the steed that saved the day
born to be seen !
then stately ships came sailing
take sculptured statesmen , hand to breast ,
swift row my mates , and shoot along the sea ;
i 'm as you see , i 'm ichabod , --
the great artists among men of letters have occasionally and by
magnus , subduing the deep sigh , with brow
the foeman ’s city shall espy ,
in the heart of june , love ,
grandson of amycla . the poet , most probably , meant to style him
the might resistless of neoptolemus ,
on his head or back a forest of leaves , or have had long
life 's game 's beginning , lad!--play your card--
and heaven 's dread king implore : " as o'er our head
quas ego non gentis , quae non face corda iugali ?
but shadows , clouds , and darkness rest upon it .
ignorance is apt to magnify , but dullness reposes in stolid
mysteries , see clem . alex . _ strom . l. i. ex . alex . polyhist _ . it
breath of the rose , laughter of maids
speak , speak , for underneath the cover there
nor can i of myself dispose , for love ;
lockt dich der tiefe himmel nicht ,
bandying thy baseness with the ruler of
in this manner . from the fourth the bones had been thrown down ,
what frost - bound winters since that natal year
like open - work of day and night .
for love of hire , if that sche wolde ,
i 's gwine up north where de good folks say
in shade of tall palm - trees ;
against the blowing smoke ,
to romp or play again .
thou couldst smile , as thou gav'st to despair .
abhorr'd him as the shade of death : then thus
and opposite the eldest household father
and ate laste thei acorde .
their sharp scythes panting through the thick - set grass ;
wrapped up in a rhyme .
angelica , while ' twixt her lips she slipt
when it thinks of ninety lines .
and called for sympathy .
" you 're a - huntin ' a wife , and i want you to see
then the mammoth was god ; now is he a prize ox .
breaks from the rustling boughs ,
and the great bear lend his counsel ,
he freed a world from monsters too .
" they 've changed , o damn it , now here 's a job . "
clear call as the sun sets .
who on the empty threshing - floor ,
until i stood , with nothing left to burn ,
a swan , superior to the rest ,
and suns that fell
its golden sands , and learn what great conceptions can.[pu ]
the cycle of a change sublime
she made the storie of the olde debate
dip the sail ! "
and smoothes them with his tail .
and try to aid her all i can ;
safer on common topicks to discourse ,
flesh and fleece , fur and feather ,
then , on the shore we slept ; and when again
its ardour stir my life ,
their shapes are quaint and beautiful ,
to think ought sweet but that which smells of thee !
" in my marriage miseries ,
when she had heard his bitter rede
and indus ' banks the murm'ring moan return'd ;
the haunt of seales and orcs , and sea - mews clang .
i sat studying at the feet of the great masters ,
the eldest heard with steady glee ;
mæonian mitre tied to chin , and wet hair done about ,
that sought the secret of the west ;
tick - tack ! tick - tack !
that they might not be laden / on wagons full five score ;
filth !
who rules the world , shall raise us up again
can turn 'em all to hate or love ;
he was not , however , a bigot to his party , nor adopted all their
this old , slow music that is like a sigh
i shall creep out into darkness .
yet once a year , one day , when summer dawns ,
his frothy slaver , venom'd bites ;
an ' by the clear burnies that sweetly meander ,
the billows smooth and bright--
that grasps -- as doth a noble bird of prey
stripped from his brows ; and he exclaimed with sighs ;
across his path .   he passed -- for naught
song , " nay , but you , who do
autumn 's near .
cast the others to the waters .
and collections of stamps ?
with the spoils of her lightly - won triumph ,
jest made an angel all complete !
at noon in marching order they were moving to the piers ;
" but never crashing iceberg
the sons are living yet at middle life ,
" well , " murmured one , " let whoso make or buy ,
touched by love 's magnet , hither often drew ;
like a sunbeam it blinks ,
was compelled to quit it owing to the disaffection of the
that heavy with fragrance bloomed near ,
walked in her father 's garden ,
there may be eastern edens deckt
what was yours and mine .
on that blank space that represents the seas ,
the editor 's wooing                     _ robert h. newell _
and faint with anguish heaved each sigh .
another instance of my glory ,
you dream of devon yet .
i have a rendezvous with death
could i curse her to her face ?
and frost a - bitin ' nose and cheek and ear ,
are kind and gentle , stern and bold ,
across the buzzing , doubting , challenging host ,
or filberts smooth , or yellow corn ;
but of the heat of julia 's breast :
which zeus gave atreus once ; and in his heart
do you know the talk of those turning eye - balls ?
rises now the sound of ancient chants
be too long : it is a fantastic image which comes out of
and all because they were possess'd
the while she raised it up .
the buried pound no more i 'll hide from sight .
if you have need of flabbier times ,
mute is the tongue , nor doth the voice obey ,
when the fair light of morning rose
and if in all her beauty / she be my wedded wife ,
though i was but a puny babe
and they eat garlic all the day ,
the dust 's grey fingers like a shielded light .
oh , there 's no need to open the door , ma'am .
bound each to each by natural piety .
and sovereign here , and the immortal choir
three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned
but john and louis soon stepp’d in ,
those who make bad verses are laughed at : but they are pleased in
into the lake and made him drown ,
could a stiletto 's one prick be prettier ?
which once was its food in that wild neighborhood
when vindhya , best of hills , would stay
or cattle , which presently came , followed by two shepherds who
and with him there
and , whether they pipe us free from rats or from mice ,
law , physic , politics , and deep divines :
o'er the flood that runs by the city wall .
of ages , and my late return to light ,
' e talks o ' " cruel tyrants " ' e'll swing for by - an'-by ,
and dear to my heart as the light to my e'e .
flaming out in their violet , yellow , and red ;
out of the way of the weather .
now what in the devil will you say ? "
and speake lowd
was like an icy crystal cup .
and said : “ the lord of life has sent
with a pair of stout shoon
laughing aloud on its way to the wars ,
etext scanned by dianne bean of phoenix , arizona .
beams not with a more constant light
in an evil mood by surprise.--
" thou , lord , must know the chapel well ,
which our just high - souled father graced ,
must fill the measure of his discontent .
myriads , free to peck and pipe :
but i know without the asking ,
for i am well - to - do -- no kin , no care ,
.     .     .     .     .
“ but that my lord the king should be
have but for aim to look on awed
else it were better we should part , and go ,
_ ador . _ is it to death ? he dieth .
and answered every flame 's combustive kiss
the dead are bushed an ' stoned to keep 'em safe below !
ses sujets avaient cent raisons
enormous , dripping blood , but still alive ,
' o rot this soldier 's life , the devil 's in it ,
the covering , which did hide such blessing from me ,
and take of fol delit no kepe ,
the baltic sea along ,
udo revincta fune puppis solvitur ,
if a gate were undone ,
spink , spank , spink ;
ring nor his partner committed the error--
he must mekely out of his hert graue
their bows would be bended , their blades would be red ,
guilty of treason , forgery , and shift ;
the privileges of the latin , or italian are two :   first that it
whilst much of this ascent is yet to climb ,
there , while the crackling flames leaped high ,
next after trouthe the secounde ,
take good care also of yourself , but you must make her swear
and rads attacked the throne and state ,
and charge ta'en of their courses ; the messengers went then
to vex rogero , most it works her woe
formed long ago , yet made to - day ,
grow more numerous and admonishing as their doom draws
who advertise new poems by your looks ,
the stone is rolled from the tomb and poland free ,
ere we rush , ere we extinguish sight and speech
of scalded heads and broken bones
meet for the mightiest hand to hold :
for mercy then i call ,
a song to make one 's belly ache ,
his ornaments her crescent lobes
once , long ago ! )
parece que decía :
strong to reclaim the wandering ,
that a level spot is near ,
the pleine contre al aboute :
true .   changes will befall , and friends may part ,
on walks or hikes , or somewhere out to play ;
cum canerem reges et proelia , cynthius aurem
theologia germanica . translated by s. winkworth . preface by c.
i lent him to a lady
as to my neck into the stream , while she ,
as the godhead doth indite .
impurpled , well denoted our ascent .
till the dilating soul , enrapt , transfused ,
see with your eyes , and set my heart
but at that christmas feast , in arthur 's hall ,
still dissuading said nokomis :
she remembers what happened before .
now pondering:--it is time we should narrate .
nothing that is can pause or stay ;
ah , love ! could you and i with him conspire
of bethlehem and hermon snow ,
up a lane .
your feet shall know the scars , my friend :
inepta nunc omnes sua
a surer stock his passion fires ,
seem a new heaven and earth so marvelous ;
" my heart to - day
thrice at the battlements patroclus strook;(246 )
that drew patrons to his mart ,
happy i , that thou art living ,
yet very fit to ' murder sleep ' in those
such , may it please you , is my humble faith ;
because its simplicity rebukes
at what he thought impertinence :
that are white in the young grasses ;
in glory , flashing fire far over earth--
and held his breath to stare ,
does not require a thing above
and think--'the lout ! i wish he 'd kept away . '
to me , physician , is the medicine .                     b.
wylde wormeȝ to her won wryþeȝ i{n } þe erþe ,
but the pansies all get muddy
none , i well know , not wishing in vain to boast .
his power can heal me , and relight my eye ;
fool ! wherefore bearest thou the bow in vain ?
al pasajero .
" and the wind out by tintinhull waking ;
from sapphire abysses
roses that grew in an enchanted garden ,
as violets blue mongst lilies pure men throw ,
into all holy forms -- a chalice , a cross ,
and here we 'll sit on primrose - banks , and see
in her shame and in her terror -- to the forest shade she fled .
he lifts by hap toward where the morning 's roots are
on whatsoever part of me he will ;
then flew leiodes to ulysses ' knees ,
o lord ! it is the greatest bore ,
hot curling round him . whither now he drives ,
with this new act of hocus pocus .
beset drake 's path with pitfalls : treacherous greed
syne jenny laid her neive in his--
that fancied goodness might be gay ,
excepting ocean waves and open air !
and find their monarch dardinello dead .
of the white chief with yellow hair ! "
" to filippo argenti : " cried they all :
fire exists the first in light ,
with him , the peerage next in power to you ;
but flies in silence from the noisy boys ;
haste therefore , let us arm , if arm we may ,
be reckoned , but with herbs and flowers ?
in travels here and there . and i was glad
by what we have mastered of good and gain ;
as trojans and their alien helpers died .
" i came to speak to you of what he wish'd ,
why keep me pacing to and fro
lord alcinous , most notable of all the people , there is a
how hard the passage , to descend and climb
in all games of skill and hazard ,
not less if unattended and alone
shall bloom in the hearts that now hold thee dear !
addressed him to the heavenly stream ;
that bears a single star .
conceived in pompous imageries ,
then strode away in mood morose ,
his task is done ill ,
  names of two tombs .
though thou loved her as thyself ,
homeward now he would be turning ;
splendidaque a docto fama refulget avo .
here 's an ill wean , john tod , john tod ,
" take my boughs , o hiawatha ! "
but still above the irish hills the stars their watches keep ,
at last hee crau'd this fauour he might haue ,
do you , that have naught other to lament ,
consequence , to find that his wife , the sister of the future
for all the world to - day ;
and all i ask is a windy day with the white clouds flying ,
the music had been left behind ;
her cheeks a mair celestial hue ,
as brownies always seem to be,--
enough -- for ever cease your murm'ring breath ;
“ why not this transformation work on me ? ”
so delicately prick'd the sign appear'd
carry not their rations to the workmen !
and her eyes the violets rivalled ,
be to my _ muse _ a friend ; assist my cause ;
or the poor potato crop ,
and cursed be the clown who would dare to offend them !
respected no man in the whole world , neither rich nor poor , who
until like a flower , full blowing ,
enclosed in brackets are almost always genuine ; all that
for the poems from the biennial anthologies , _ georgian
and , coming from my wild retreat ,
and from out his dreams awakened ,
come in , come in , you are welcome .
who from hollow boughs above him
the king of gods who rules on high ,
arrowes so thick , in such aboundance light ,
a stone jug and a pewter mug ,
a happy man was he who fastest hied
and with desponding hearts put off to sea .
as birds within the green shade of the grove .
around the lady 's form rare beauty threw .
racing down the valley ,
o life ! how pleasant in thy morning ,
to hell perpetual ,
little things with lovely eyes
--but he laughed and danced up , what , old boy , are you there ?
with lingering smile upon her lip she lists ,
what are changes of empires , the wreck of dynasties , with the
like the rising sun in summer
while in the violet that greets the sun ,
with cries and with shouts the wild hunters , o'erjoy'd ,
in paris , whatever they do besides ,
( all mr . bushel ’s kin ) ,
with pride maternal beat her breast
tell me the damage , and have done . '
though all in vain .
and news he spred abaht the tahn ,
an ' be a rich merchunt -- an ' wear fine clothes?--
i murmured .   ` nay , kind sister , ' she replied ,
thus spake the briton prince , with humble cheer
are ours , nor soul helps flesh more , now , than flesh helps soul ! "
ghosts of speech .   till then i would love to have my hour as a
a poem which needs no dedication . james barron hope , 264 .
but she gave us last night such a terrible fright ,
bring the best of lapland virgins ,
we walked between the stillnesses and roars
stay his returne perhaps over this gulfe
an ancient story i 'll tell you anon
why weak as are her frailer trailing weeds ,
who nourished me with fondest care ,
a simple child , dear brother jim ,
i lighted my tall happy candle of bear fat ;
feel the wounds of thy disdaining ,
and blow through the windows at will
nor understanding , fit to justify
i 'll fly from shepherds , flocks , and flow'ry plains ,
with copious hand , rejoycing in thir joy .
and a cruel rebel ball had wounded him full sore
it jarred the stars with its harsh tongue .
the lofty vault , to gather and roll back
in this sort , end at least with the beginning .
memory , so that it seems not that i ever saw thee . but tell me
thy scent will be to bliss invited ;
but who , wandering through the midnight hour ,
thou must not move — so maimed thou art
to sojourn in the world , and yet apart ;
i owe the honor of the present visit ,
smith had a friend , we 'll call him brown ;
at hands of the fiddler , / whereof right surely was there need .
therefore bequeathed they ethics to the world .
she will not ask ,
hill after hill thou climbest , and the day
while round his couch 's golden rim
darted his own huge shadow , and vanished away into darkness .
he went to door and called " come in , my dear . "
is it nat better for one his tunge to kepe
' twas a very small garden ;
right over us ; but he was not afraid ;
_ young benson _ [ _ to lucy _ ] . hence away !
had really eloped . "
conferring with the frankness that befits ?
lines on cutting down trees in the streets , ii . 53 ;
when green - mantled spring shall come
as my other chums have done ,
when god with us was dwelling here ,
( as these poor souls had done ) we need but turn
so numerous were these enemies ,
what such might bode .   she slid awry ;
to win my favour wrought with tireless hands ,
and bear him hence out of this cruel sun ?
beyond her sex she was not wise ;
this modern world hath need of thee !
nor she , for mass or service said , her woe
and cresses , glittered and sang
grew up and wanted to return home .   mercury told him this in all
for love all love of other sights controls ,
unto my lord , who was so worthy of honour ;
with it you balance or propel
there sweetly shall i sleep ;
this the goddess set the curetes and the aetolians fighting
of a sun - kiss , so they say ? "
" absent or dead
and most of the weapons , despite their seeming ,
ham told all men that sarra was his sister , [ and ] thus
the dogs were handsomely provided for ,
so smite , that me were lief
the rails were piled in heaps and soon became
three tall poplars beside the pool .
and they travelled by night and they slept by day ,
to hear the thuds , and see the cluds
hold her accursed ; or to some poor maid ,
the doves beside the shadowy waterway ,
sink now thy weary feet ?
what we ought not , we do ,
and my tired mind felt weak and blank ;
came to bid the strangers welcome ;
peer closely one at other , to spy out
and pleads across the waste to thee .
nor shine like fur upon a beast of prey ,
as strickly as thou may ) save one of these ,
the music that i care to hear .
each passing year !
and if my stocking hung too high ,
baith snell an ' keen !
then go we to smoking ,
ha , ha , but he never tarries !
and the low , bright planets , one by one ,
be weie of kinde his propre sete
weep , neighbours , weep ; do you not hear it said
she who might have no bed except his bosom ,
and in her pale dominion checks the night.--iii . 726 - 32 .
i must endure the torturing ray ,
in process of the seasons have i seen ,
los enriques y reales
so pitiful as these !
the wrong he hath in right . they doubt he hath thine ear ,
' ask more of him if more thou wouldest know ,
appears far off a mill the wind is turning ,
most like the narrow streak of gold
the feet that fell ;
scented as it passes !
what coroners would call an awkward job ,
bring as merry a christmas
et sonitum uentis concessit , nubibus ignem .
of all the patrimonie , which a few
tho ' at his birth deceitful fortune smil'd ,
a swarthy gump leers at the damn'd :
fate is unyielding ;
joss'akeed , a prophet .
his army unto men he could present
i bring . ’ since of all crafts in this young earth
leads , thro ' perplexing thorns , to this obscure abode .
compare them with the bettering of the time ,
if feeling prompt not , if it doth not flow
there my garden grows again
is but a puny to this mighty god ,
the lesson that thy faithful love has taught him
on the sombre rafters , that round him made
to the honour of the day ,
the justice and right of it ,
nor others shall prevail , since nought is gain'd
untill she raught * * the gods owne mansions .
i knew her for a little ghost
love imaged in that cordial look
and my lover 's kiss still thrills and lingers ,
the body , than invent
which by theyr bablynge wordes and langage
and brings them straight into his house ,
beneath gibraltar to the lybian sands .
i exclaimed : " alas , ye powers ,
lvii . halesus , when a boy , in woods concealed ,
nay , it is time to go .
and there were little children here to play ,
then i cast loose my buff - coat , each holster let fall ,
ei'/qe genoi / mhn . . . would i were *
within she is a sinner ; like those panels
she leaves me for a younger swain ,
respect to every inmate 's claim ,
and the lazy drone of the ancient mill ,
now the bow receives its respite
lifting the murmur of its multitude
so went the years . the flowers blossomed now
the hundred little lands within one little land that lie ,
and in many a fold
fell source o ' a ' my woe and grief !
dawn , and , in your fresh and deep - felt kisses ,
i heard ye could cool heat , and came
and simple in the world , and doth not need
air,--_von weber 's _ derniere pensee .
autumnis sterilis duobus adstem ?
and with the guilt another falsely charged .
rather than belong to thee . '
arrives in false alcina 's empery :
was hurled once more against the rebel flanks .
proclaiming he will be a priest !
immeasurable carnage : here the sword ,
arrows for the great magician ,
befell that with a bowe on honde ,
and philip ray the miller 's only son ,
he falls ; but at a banquet , public shame !
the ground defiling . hapless phœdimas ,
spoke of our lay      in unsparing praise ,
serpents , and serpents to fish , that the boundaries of these
and even spoiled the women 's chats
so very simple is the road ,
and whan that it was tyme for to go ,
fond memory brings the light
look downward , and contemplate , what a world
proceeding thence , we sigh'd , and roamed the waves ,
how hard , when those who do not wish
while the old dutch clock in the chimney - place
lacking in life and strength ,
then he threw some cocoanuts , threw them down ker - flop .
nickname for sailors .
the song of the minstrel ; the yeomen 's quarrel
so small were those five ships below the walls
" i am aglaurus , who became a stone ! "
he tantz de cancan , sacrament !
ears that love silences better than noise ;
the stars are golden fruit upon a tree
ungraceful merriment , and yet keeping up the spirit of liveliness
they are the only ones still left ,
neither hat nor bonnet on !
to waken and weep at the dawn of the day .
for the pleasure of the morning ,
to those low places for iniquity ,
i charge you disturb not my slumbering fair .
with echoing shouts of laughter and alien song .
my love is summer passing through the land .
ask why equipped with shaft and bow
the shoulder , fair as sunless snow ,
for a butcher i am , and to nottingham
and thou be firm in hope , my son belov'd . "
fierce he may appear ,
let thy sweet , distant whisper soothe my ear ,
and when his hopes were all on fire ,
and glad am aw that aw came hither ,
she dwells within the shadowy land ,
my humble book of verses thrived
thurgh wast of love , that thei spente
shower on the world in distillations bright .
at the death - stake her warrior - love is tied :
o sally , i have got the whole
and daily , when the morning beam
breath beaten out , foam - white .   anew
that 's why i tried to pat anne 's curls ,
not the swan on the lake , or the foam on the shore ,
than thou , ' mid other ladies throned in grace?--
pleasures wag on in thy tail ,
this thou shouldst know , who , from the painted feature
the burnish of no sin ,
white with " odonto " shone his teeth ,
faint as a new - washed soul but lately up
there was she well received , and spoke with hiopa the king . { 1k }
where now the seamew pipes , or dives
( for in deep sand he fell ) stood long erect ,
o ! human love ! thou spirit given ,
and the round ocean , and the living air ,
till the loosen'd river in fury rolls
let every soul a sentry stand .
let the president sleep -- tears will hallow the ground ,
of future riches .
who through the foremost combatants advanced
we sang like this , like anything ,
" and tho ' but few -- tho ' fast the wave
but spring 's twice as bonny agean ,
last night in sleep i saw thee , who didst seem
where the first -- where the last of her patriots lies ?
the kings at vespers might be lingering still .
left on the herbage green its stain .
_ fortunam priami cantabo , & nobile bellum . _
and my soul grows sad as i think of the day--
.     .     .     .     .
--risum _ tenaetis , amici _
such as in christ , or ere he came , believ'd .
ev'n while the arrow whistled through the sky ,
affections epidemical .
bart .     ay , and i 've wandered long
that sory hadden be toforn .
as cheerful as she can ;
of that hire lord so nyh hire side
yet still he hangs on,--
with the nerves of a sampson , this son of the sledge ,
scratches with a crying sound .
urget in nodos tepentis , ipsa roris lucidi ,
fortune hath made his virtue good ,
attract thy fairy fingers near the lyre
" what panic fear has seiz'd your souls ? o shame ,
they travel wherever the wounded are .
to cast it in the fireâthe vain old harp
an argive victim doth the god demand . _
and when the night her sleepy veil did take
what is this alien thing , so near , so far ,
and went to making pies .
of those who force to sing thy trembling strings ?
on either side a boar - like tusk did stand ,
the appointed youth reposed ,
measure the circle ; and , though pondering long
before we boast , unjustly still , of her enforced prise ,
no " minstrel rapture " find for thee ?
thine attitude of cold , estranged reproach ,
sets to the mystic mere , the phantom fell ,
to lift them through the fight ,
that seems not to exist , yet ever longs
i 'd a throwed ' er in three rivers .
" that night he slept not -- with the morn was gone ;
mayor of london , whose re - election in 1384 was so
sins against god , who for his use alone
when mortals have forgot their fellow men .
you would - be quenchers of the light to be ,
i think so .
' tis of my grace to each one who believes .
stow the satire , chop the frivol . "
within my chamber , where no light will be ;
to check the erring , and reprove ;
a seed god sows--
that lately didst exclaim in lombard phrase ,
the bishopric of fair dunkeld .
who bade her flay her fellow - men
and enter and close my door--
he thrust his hand under his jersey and lugged
and laid them on the outside of the wall
the strings of a lute to a lover 's song ;
a flight of bold eagles from adria 's strand :
however short your stay ; the aid of both
flies the fierce hawk by thy supreme command ,
and , like a child once more at home
it was a vast and venerable pile ;
so late emerged from , shall so soon expire . ]
first balancing on this side , then on that ,
of incense curled about her , and her face
through storm , and fear , and strife ,
to swell the throbbing organ 's thunderous roll .
and if i look the boy will lower ,
and gawain sware , and louder than the rest . '
a man must cover with travelling sheep a six - mile stage a day ;
bright emblem of the majesty on high ,
endowd with all thir gifts , and o too like
where dante speaks of " one following the laws , and one the
blossom heard this order : " send this dispatch at once ! "
jove to the vanquisher of ino 's guard ,
and played snap - out at winchester .
how that my ladi berth the pris ,
yet sure thou did'st lodge heere : this wombe of mine
they mark their sickly champeen on the stage ,
the marii and camilli , names of might ,
and if we tried to stem the wave , we could not .
as the light that danced on their homeward way
cool'd every breast , and damp'd the rising joy .
as fought with flaming ire / the son of valiant aldrian .
in the amfalula tree .
no childeric he , yet much declined
and doth beside on rimeless numbers tread ;
sublime in air his course he took
and endless happiness of thine own name ,
was a half - grown wild - boar / that he smote to ground ;
concluded was , the dog replied ,
seem'd to darken the lines of long sorrow and care ,
as i passed along the streets i could see through the uncurtained
these teach us patience , we confess ,
' that 's overmuch , ' quoth lancelot , ' tho ,
marmion might hear the mingled hum
cheerly rouse the slumb'ring morn ,
fast he stealeth on , though he wears no wings ,
the dead hath now his offerings duly paid .
as of innumerable wings ,
it seemed ' twas golden smoke around , or sunbeams lightly tost ;
and while they were growling , and mumbling the chops ,
golden lads and girls all must ,
down drop the winds , the zephyrs cease to sigh ,
but at fair aim and glad .   yet is it true ,
meanwhile ulysses , and th ' ajaces both ,
they most aspire who meekly most adore !
his barns were fired , his goods consumed ,
thy nest which thou canst drop into at will ,
not seldom , brother , it hath chanc'd for men
our glorious god his creatures weaknesse sees ,
king of all the flowery meadows ,
and never looks behind ;
the garrulous waves ceaselessly talked of hidden treasures ,
unshrinking as simpson 's serge , and free
dear mother of fresh thoughts and joyous health !
with frigates , sloops , and galleys near ;
these isles , these shores , this mount and vale
o well for the sailor lad ,
you sleep ; our tears are only wet :
month when mosses near the stream ,
which ' mongst the tender _ fibres _ breed ,
and toil through various climes ,
both are rotten bad !
green - walled by the hills of maryland .
beside the window . did he sit and look
athene , saying : ' hear me , thou who yesterday didst come in
she saw the helmet and the plume ,
but since i 've been away f'm home , my paper ( seems to me )
let me read in good books , and believe , and obey ;
shall he be free from the haunting thought
a sonnet is a moment 's monument,--
remember that !   it 's natural
" ----_pleasure is spread through the earth
lay trapped there by the black head - wind that blew
comes dancing .
over the corpse , and all the flush of life
invisible and hoar ;
theological and four cardinal virtues .
and these have been a presence that is kind ,
he spoke , and round him breathed heroic fires ;
now tell me the reason , i pray . "
and warm his hands .
" that pace ca n't hold,--there ! steady ! whoa ! "
because that it was old and somedeal strait
singing lowly , meekly , slowly ,
to extinguish the fever of ail ?
and was polluted as a mountain stream
the cloud gathers about it its flowing veils and swarming foam of
for if you hit me , knave , i 'll call thee , beggar .
boys and girls that lie
traces of maritime adventure
some day.--alas , alas !
sponge cake : bake in a greased and floured 9 - inch square or
apollo for a _ star _ he 'd quit ,
lo , the little harebell leans
and or ever that evening ended a great gale blew ,
when it is laden like a groaning sky
on śiva ’s head descending first
of amplitude almost immense , with starr 's
i put him on de road , an ' he almos ' flew .
and bright as gold the ripples be
do trials , unexpected , rise ?
but it is time that thou shouldst seek the hills ,
or disappointed passion lurked below :
a bridge maintains , which there a stream bestrides ,
but , with permission , i will tell a tale .
here ; here for battle stand your lawful chiefs :
bade them lay hands on the tackling , and speedily they
perish your dreams of conquest then , your swollen
two little tears suffice to cover all :
when he went away with his host , and i rejoiced , for i believed
into the heaven of heavens i have presumed ,
latinus ' pastures ; then with back - turned eyes
then soul learn'd more than barren sense can teach
but they said , " tell us whether your shoes are of leather ,
would turn and smile at me --
as when we murmured our troth - plight
to carroll 's work . '--_new york bookworm . _
herald of a mighty band ,
but prized , but loved , but eminent in you ,
then his videhan spouse to please
hat honour , and lip service of the world ,
_ and were i only young again _ !
and nightingales in yonder wood
to reade my fault , and , wondring at my flame ,
to crush them now were an easy deed , "
for with his eye he could not follow it
i leave it behind with the games of youth:"--
and hence the villain has supplied their war .
so o - kis - ko loved wi - no - na ,
climbs their white shoulders , buoys their streaming hair ,
and laid the aged seer alone
as the dome in this chalice ,
' when i had legs , then had i wings ,
so we keep the ball a - rollin ' on ten deaths a day .
so long as faith with freedom reigns
that thou art noon of tho , that dorste i seye .
forerunneth of its own accord the asking .
a hat of monstrous size !
lord stephen of amboise on the ditch 's brim ,
drawing near against us . '
but indrajít , when báli ’s son(953 )
proudly this heritage maintain ,
stricken with fear when we arrested him . "
the smallest gift thou never wilt disown .
the wind has magic in its touch ;
when hearts to each other reply !
with scream of shot and burst of shell ,
and be ye call'd , my absent kisses .
in we came , an ' time enough , ' cross bilbao bar .
leaves of blue .
nought cared this body for wind or weather
who seeketh heaven , and comes of heavenly breath .
and , looking o'er the hedge , be - fore me i espied
but -- blast ' er silly eyes !
tri - anti - wonti-
to see them , ever side by side ,
but then i have to be more strict
with goodwill have i granted thee the heavenly house to share ;
in the doors of these your garners the bat - folk shall cling ;
could so prevail o'er nature , and weak man
pourtraying in deep thought contemplative
hence hath it semblance , and is shadow call'd ,
of flesh of many a savage beast ,
and his songs shall fill all climes ,
joyous .
" with every bounding keel that dares my rage ,
and in his joy be blest .
i took him from the routed foe .
all treasures and all gain esteem as dross ,
ideas die and old religions perish ,
infinite goodness to the little bounds
professor child calls this a ‘ precious specimen of the unspoiled
and thee sad death in my false sleepe was showne :
but 's in the struggle thrown ,
they tug , they sweat ; but neither gain , nor yield ,
weep for the voiceless , who have known
black as the storm and fearful as the night :
torment , and lowd lament , and furious rage .
the discord which befel , and war in heaven
where wild and free the eagles soar ,
and some , agreeing , sought the mayor 's hall ,
a race of nobles may die out ,
stretch'd towards me , careful not to overpass
be centre to the world , and other stars
circumstance of a may - fair footman achieving sudden affluence by
fresh gathered on the royal way .
and broken arms and disarray
run fire of blue and yellow in a puzzle ,
( lines 7 & 8 untranslated by rose )
--strange words they seem'd of slight and scorn ;
for them , within the orphan 's home ,
broad on the pages of the days and nights ,
_ that _ was , is , and shall be :
rapture wells forth , and all space is radiant with light .
to that king paladin with praise replied
and the path that we shuddered at caught the sky 's fire ,
i have at last revenge .
shall rob you , victors , of a world subdued --
they heard those deeper songs begin.--
brands from the fire are missive weapons made ,
its leaves to the rival sky .
should the iron snap asunder ,
making them horrible names , hated in all of the world :
they had gone forth to win far citizens ,
their brains , no doubt , like galley - slaves the turk
by simply meek : that suffering for truth 's sake
but these new vandals can but make a rain - proof barrenness .
and , subtly of herself contemplative ,
la corona de rocío .
he woke up shrieking with fear and pain ,
the sylphs through mystic mazes guide their way ,
wielded by german demons ;
" he 's worn out . he 's asleep beside the stove .
the common forms of earthly mould ,
heavy the sorrow that bows the head
out of some chant that demons sing
wot was always the kind of a woman i ' ates .
down amang the broom , my dearie ,
by all let this be heard ,
was never ; arms on armour clashing brayed
for often would the lonely man entrapped
past youth where shoreward shallows are ,
an ' for auld airn , the smashed débris
there is one with gold agleam ,
" heaven to this bourne my rescued steps hath led ,
but for thy people 's sake destroy them ,
in arts of counsel and dissembling well ;
the river bank to tighten the mule 's girth , i heard the accursed
the primrose in her vernal nest ,
" but we shall see him first , " whispered the vine reassuringly .
i hear the steps of modred in the west ,
upon their weary way repose the three .
we scarce can think it heralds night!--
but present punishment pursues his maw ,
whene'er to drink you are inclined ,
excuse my freedom , when i here assure you ,
you in vain , reverse your cruel doom ;
prepares me for the toils of light--
and laughs amid the strife .
that it was no dream , but the very truth itself . "
from the lake herself ascended ,
of wrath divine to hope their country more .
or with a voice endued the chattering pye ?
that where birds sing and yellow wild - flowers dwell ,
to boast of lancelot , or thy table round :
from mortal man derived , but from a god .
and bristled thick with sharpen’d stakes below .
splendet adtrito digitos honorans
by the leaping skies o'erhead ,
it 's no in titles nor in rank ;
will be the rule , our elenors will find
hung on the words whence wisdom should be drunk ;
so up to dunbar cromwell went ;
have lighted arctic icebergs , southern seas ,
thunders and flames jehovah 's threatening rod ,
was held the saturnalia of red death !
my own dear genevieve !
two broad suns their shields
he flung them down and went his way ,
and the heron , the shuh - shuh - gah ,
there 's a heap of pent - up goodness in the yellow
among the flashing waves are two white birds
how beautiful she is !   a tulip - wreath
then all around was dark again ,
saint folly rode beside jehanne
in the dark vaults of the infernal hall . "
the diamond sleeps within the mine ,
and smith and brown in this and that ,
“ are equall'd , thrice an hundred harvests i ,
for friendship 's sake by chiron to his sire .
though fate said -- a hero shall perish in light ;
allow me the hunting of man,--
and thou -- what needest with thy tribe 's black
" god 's gracious wonders from the times of old .
none ever walk by mine ;
out of the east of love , and be the shrine
now look about you , kriemhild ! for servants seek anew ;
in florid beauty groves and fields appear ,
but all creation share in knowledge vast
my track of life has been too narrow ,
sit here and muse!--it is an antique room--
and gave my spirit deploring
but aflatun turned round on him
and all her sisters married off , and none but her and john
the truths ye urge are borne abroad
leap'd from the chariot sthenelus , and stood
forthi , if eny man forsueie
where very flame of ætna 's womb her jaws were pouring forth ;
who prays for our poor nation lying low ?
the wrack of time , upcast on ruinous coasts ,
of course would by thy reasoning be destroyed .
will you pay me the price ? " said the spirit from hell .
i have found a delicate , wave - green solitude .
robs me of the sweets of sleeping .
hate stronger , under shew of love well feign'd ,
dr . hamilton observes that the light of small stars are seen
all flesh is grass , one says ;
one and the selfsame tongue first wounded me ,
out from the patches of briers and blackberries ,
as wild and as untamable
the forward path again ; so as the way
with meet tranquillity ,
of mist , dream vague in view .
" beauteous stranger , light as day
she gamboll'd on the greens
grown old in less successful war ;
like loving vines hid under ivory ,
of haunted catskill break ;
( kipling : _ mulholland 's contract . _ )
perching on the sceptred hand
the outcast knew it -- what she might have been .
and many tender things she said .
to his dear and aged mother ;
in a dingy eating house ; he had laughed and
for souls of the felled
i carena for my pitcher , nor
never touching the cates , or the dishes or plates ,
now on dim threads of gossamer
and the " craps , " this year , were somewhat slow .
for thee i mourn , and mourn myself in thee ,
here and there five hairs whispering in a corner ,
the darkest of enigmas , human hope ;
then removed to california ,
the memory of my selfishness and pride ,
and the milkmaid singeth blithe ,
with hopeless brows and tossing up of hands--
( for ' twas made of ice and snow ) ;
thou green - crested lapwing , thy screaming forbear--
then hoped ' gainst hope to enter it again .
" far and sure ! far and sure ! " fill the bumper and drain it ,
libation meet to the saturnian king
broad deep . '
whose treach'rous sons the fountain 's gifts denied ;
stretched out his dead cold face against the foe :
filled the lone shore with louder merriment ,
adopt my creed , and count all days the same ,
as his thoughts ran back to the youth he knew .
at least you 'd live -- in marble ;
that , say what they will , i am forc'd to complain .
the " planter of the lion , " which through fire
who knows but the world may end to - night ?
` thanks , my love , ' she said ,
the air is pearly , iridescent , pure ;
a little crippled figure , two big pathetic eyes ,
on some puir wight ,
of simony .   stretch'd at their length they lie
and archaists mumbling dry bones up the land
but not where pleasure each new fancy tried ,
this world . "
thou seekest , caesar , here our arms and swords
the last of his horrible scaly race
which her husband had won as prizes . when she reached the
that the chaste pencil may not err
has fed without restraint or trouble ,
spake the daughter of tuoni ,
liber vagat per auras
of phantom sails that vanish and emerge .
the monster whales may overturn our boat !
on the page it squirts its draught
observing still the motions of their flight ,
meet a young pair whose beauty wants
  the north wind .
the gods are wounded in her sight ;
loose on the breeze their tresses flew ,
and sweeps across the vale ;
and the same slaves to the same tyrants thrown ,
not , as upon the former battle 's eve ,
whilst from each wide spread casement down there falls
to many young readers this method in art comes like a revelation .
ae tay i shot , and shot , and shot ,
and with one word my whole years work doth rend .
that keeps a man from harm .
till , things arriving at a state
it is sometimes read " orient . "
the giant , though he longed to slay
reliant i intrust thee , and -- because
gladdening the thronged spirits .   each did seem
where to hide from my pursuers ,
for our day is dead and has left no traces
do but note how the puppy flings back with a yawn ,
swaggering . " i do n't care , " the young man cries , with a sort of
no -- vain , alas ! th ' endeavor
' tom brown , ' and plotinus , they 're all of them books .
or , in its shingle trireme launched ,
now i have broken beauty 's wall ,
yet each has a vanity fair of his own ; —
_ prices _ and _ texts _ at once assail you--
to lett one ride a iournie on a iade .
i see his dreams .
down into the store room . no one looks after it now my father is
in christian charity ( good - natured age ! )
this elenor murray through my wife . these two
they hear above their graves the grass
ti saluto , rosignolo
which walls with many spears they man ,
high up on the shakiest munitions truck ,
form'd a vault of cool verdure , which made , when the heat
for these the manners , nay the mind , express :
and a man of the woody land ,
undaunted ' mid the hostile might
" o come and see , " quo ' findlay ;
where is the throng , the tumult of the chace ?
as they were munching their luncheon treat .
horridly violating cloud for drought :
as faith had not been shine : without the which
of sunlight ) looked the lombard piles ;
always disengaged and cheerful :   he at some times pursued his
ah , ofttimes love its own wild choice will blame ,
till thou the freedom of the city grant
like the midsummer madness
to execute the vengeance of its wrath .
thought the sun had left his station
_ tauted _ , or _ tautie _ , matted together ( spoken of hair and wool ) .
then do thou forbid thy children ,
for ye shall wake to it again
sad and ancient cemetery,--
the waters as they ran redden'd with blood .
performing a _ chaine des dames _ in style ;
" gladly will i aid you , annie , and if you truly wish to be
some glimmering sparks remain'd . of these , they part
  by the earthquake at the death of the saviour .
that pipes in the grey eve .
in the wounds of us , the wretched ,
home comes the sailor , home across the tide !
when his people to battle are pouring
others . the servants brought him a portion of meat , and an upper
these swarming restless souls innumerable ,
do you ever think of me , left in the light ,
came up , and with his leash unbound ,
the cavalier , whose arms that blazon bear ,
neud carchar anwar enwiredd eingl - dud ,
all widowed , till he find the way to me ;
after the hallow'd words .   we unoppos'd
was pure as cloistered nun ! "
to the chaste stars their confessors , or told
on mouldering bones their cold unwholesome dews ;
sorrowful is the little house ,
ch . poseidon gave us no command ,
other assistance . but because on earth it is taught in your
" and must we really part for good ,
and i 'll kiss me gel in blighty in the mawnin ' .
burned for a moment with immortal youth ,
gaze i long with fervid power
weep great rivers from thine eyelids ;
in wild meanderings o'er pasture wealth--
written . then he made the sign of holy cross upon them ; whereon
it threatened worst of all the bevy ;
if thou wilt love , and live with me .
i will go with my father a - ploughing
when she smelt the rose ,
was assailed and killed on duty ,
who carried the baby ,
my mistrust ; but i have in my own mind a notion
in fact with doubled good you paid me .
gie little kate her button gown
i kept my eyes ever spying
of mortal men on the earth?--
lost his footing , and over the perilous brow
thrice from the ground she leap'd , was seen to wield
an ' the bairnies farther still ;
lest he might wake too soon , fled back , and then , fond renegade ,
is no foolish jest ...
" god must be lonely -- oh , so lonely lone !
plus enclin a blamer , que savant a bien faire.--warton .
into the eyes of passers - by .
just to get nuts for jocko . he got none .
" no , we do n't think , but we feel . "
for noble deeds ? and truly i , when first
to all who plunder from the immortal mind
green , pellucid , gently rushing ,
thay muster up fresh energy
and classes formed in pride have neither hearts ,
their sire alberto , and next him themselves .
i would not choose the sunflowers that unclose
to blest nirvana , with the gods , attaining .
calls , mocking , up the stair .
the tumult of the purpling deeps , and all
that aught should be too great for mortal powers
he had not the deer i - flaw
stern lawgiver ! yet thou dost wear
all alone within the crimson wood with god .
and thou , glad genius ! in whose gentle hand
lo , when we wade the tangled wood ,
he knew how to play hide - and - seek
and afterwards produced the following version of the
again the hawthorn shall supply
when shall we three meet again
you would , you think , be just and kind ,
when i tell you groves , gardens , fine water , and hall ,
and prove them merely mortal .
and so it 's better as it is--
each meadow path , and stream , and orchard - tree ,
duly should every heart confess ;
is clearly betokened      that the time is near ,
said he , " is this stranger that is lately come here ? is he one
the very tongue , whose keen reproof before
and give all his hopes the lie ?
lyaeus gave ,
and , for the love of god that us bath wrought ,
till the day of the blast of the battle
tidings of glorious face and lovely bloom ,
besides , there 's nothing sacred , nothing free
five or six days ( though it be uncertain yet whether i shall ever
to order in the breakfast then and there ,
hints from the independent heart or head
but dreams came by and smilingly
“ his knees assisting with some strong support .
they said , she might , indeed , the gem bestow ,
j jumped for it .
now a straight line , now crook'd , now all .
and , with my justice , may i mingle love ,
and champing golden grain , the horses stood
but soon sinks , and you hear ,
i have dwelt so long on this subject that i must contract what i
“ mine own dear son , ” and forth he hied .
and , o my brother , how can i
as he was holde of his beheste .
it covers , pestilent in summer oft .
is led , the funeral of his lord to wait .
glad again ,
i loved him for himself alone .
we knew her for a neighbor in the town ,
dear to the lowland reaper ,
the burden heavier growin ' every day .
till all the sea be life and light ,
reach with your whiter hands to me
rychely beton on the molde.aeuro(tm )
unknown as yet what they could do ;
though many - windowed mansion fronts
with an illustrious , but tremendous , power
as , when a bell no longer swings ,
and ' twas foretold by some attendant dames
here ellis met us with his men .
she at her opposite her lance addrest ;
would shake him with convulsive sobs .
he kissed her and blessed her , and then flew away .
picturesque ; and their effect , when burns visited them , was much
if you would win the prize ;
dawties of heliconian dames !
the stranger , whom he saw still lingering there .
" gintlemen , i congratu - late yez wid a pride that
big with the charge th ' infernal crew
tumble out , children , here we 're at home !
and fruits , promiscuous , ever - teeming earth ,
and so do numbers more , i 'll boldly say ,
beside the river where the fireflies pass ,
begin your music , and let me forget the pain ; let me feel in
there saw they barley heaped on high
so he reports : and in each other charge
exactly like , some people say ,
in his best suit to wander arm - in - arm
he sits , the antic - pawed , the proven friend ,
poetical reputation , that i am not willing to dismiss them with
oh how much i miss those worthies !
and them the unhappy father sent to seek
" i forgive , " said hassan . " yet we read , "
think ye -- how short the life of man !
far as the solar walk or milky way ;
alas , it gives me pain !
than kingly robes , than crowns and globes ,
the lady's - head upon the prow
the hedges all have vanished from his eyes ;
feeding on sweet poesie ,
saucius at juvenis nota intra tecta refugit ,
with flourishes beyond compare ,
and was , besides , a tyrant to his wife .
with gret worschipe and , as men seide ,
and we were fifteen weel - made men ,
joyfully they haste indoors ;
out of this world . and sche anon
gardens and groves , presented to his eyes
they swore the man would die .
as then , instead of cabinet dinners
us the ploughmen and the hewers of wood ,
there 's meaning in that homely phrase
but ther warn't no man ther
or did you love the god of flies who plagued
the bright ideas flood at once confess'd ;
sonnets and epigrams . in his _ leyendas y poemas _ he proved
when the bud was on the tree ;
whose fathers , of old , sang in concert with thine ,
" and though i 've said that conscience lies
the pain and heedless blight .
conduct towards poets , players and the town in general , i doubt
where he the sightless mantle / from alberich soon won .
and yellow - pressmen thronged the sunlit street
as cadmus once a new way found ,
the mare was led before him .
again i thought on my forsaken wife ,
than ever have your sex with slander stung .
of woodland god ! queen dian in the chase ,
and lang , lang greet or kilmeny come hame !
i climb .   the staircase clock strikes one .
on her bosom lying dead .
odysseus checked and held her in her eagerness , and
and men to god thereby are nighest raised .
since time was first a fledgling ;
and this wan feeling peoples many a page--[lg ]
the first , and sought the forehead , and half missed ,
a delicate wine - green , a carbuncle red ,
aqvam albanam , romane , caue lacu teneri ,
that only beams in an immortal morn ,
youth 's dreams hung singing , and time 's truth
with whole vertebrae will puzzle
but heaven 's free love dealt equally to all ?
pudoris intactum decus
here finds perfection from the builder 's hand ,
their eager naked arms about him cast ,
all his men forbade he / henceforth to say aught
o'er each turret 's murky head ,
yes , i love her , i have never
and draw our bottom to an end ,
i veil mine eyes for shame ,
on that rich man 's face the while ,
boots it to us , if shakspeare err'd like man ?
and take thy lovely daughter home :
e'en in our ashes live their wonted fires .
why have you sought the greeks , eros ,
for my heart burns like theirs that did not know him ,
porque la fiesta empezada
chaucer , in the " reves tale , " uses it in the more modern sense of
the swift destroyer circles rapidly ,
hath won the key to philip ? oh , i know
shut up in paris ( _ second edition , enlarged _ ) 1 v.
so that the weather , or the ferule 's stings ,
and hero and there are blushing and blowing
" i have prayed for thee with bursting sob
how true , how blameless was the love i bore ,
and strait conjunction with this sex : for either
of unrequited love .
“ the paltry pebbles on the hollow drum .
" oh , no , i 'll not , i 'll help you to spin . "
the foaming blew - gods rage ;
und gutemberg gifed dem all a kick
yet conquering truly - and not dies in vain
my heart will soon be but a stone , iced and red .
but wore his soul away , and inly pin'd
the other night i had the felicity to take a small trip on one .
that came at first between it and the griffin ,
would drown my feeble undertone .
is it for want of sleep ,
and only hear the great world 's voice which rings
who with desire to see him stirs our hearts . "
and ryche castell{es } in~ that contre ,
in hand uplifted high ,
there came his room - fellow ,
and helpful hand ; progressive , brave , refined ,
and ever strove to expiate
for be thine invitations sent
outside that which was there , like an horizon which is growing
i saw the interminable corps , i saw the processions of armies ,
tell me that my ears may hear it ,
" phlegyas , phlegyas , thou criest out in vain
where dewdrops pearl the wood blue bells
but priest and people slumber hard .
into our goblin - town . "
oh zeus , what a sight ! with the wine dripping off it ,
sadness of flesh , twining madness of the night .
when swift as the hawk , in the stormy november ,
of man 's revealed , incessant worth ,
thou , strong in faith , art gifted to conceive
farewell , farewell ! but this i tell
with eagerness and haste , that needs
lest having that , or this ,
at least one of them!--oh , the heavy night ,
thus is his cheek the map of days outworn ,
which is played upon the shingles
marshal villeroy , held the fortified town of cremona during the
now from the third question thou must not shrink ,
love , that midst grief began ,
non illi uenator equus , non spicula curae ,
unquestioning loyalty , but in others he is less certain of kingly
it is accepted ,
this world would be the reign of endless night :
_ no other thought be in your heart ! _
wound on them and struck them through .
the bat began with giddy wing
but little and white
here comes the _ snarl_-horn , _ brawl_-horn , _ lewd_-horn ,
copies was made for harding 's biographical mirror .   bromley
and in a hovel rude ,
i was three and he was four ;
see how she 's meeting them , plunging all the while ,
it may be remarked , that in this elegy , and in most of his
a drop will fill it to its rosy rim .
sons of men who sat in council with their bibles
glad a pretty lady
now i am taking you back with me again .
there falls the shadow of the fruit
how deeply , how dearly one woman might love you ! )
i know where evening keeps her store
but could not reach herâlook'd and look'd again ,
before her body knew the flame ,
but now,--away with dreaming !
of the roots of the oak is the flooring made ,
perfection , and a vision give to man
free to ride the rolling billows .
i 'll walk where my own nature would be leading :
dust of my warm heart 's garden , yet i hold ,
" stop , stop , john gilpin!--here 's the house ! "
ranged every quarter , animating loud
with its desolating vengeance ,
and , in the boisterous pauses , lets his stare
i did n't want to do it , for i knew what i should get ,
and riht so thei as for the tyme
while , on the meadow elm , the meadow lark gushed forth in music ,
before the mighty army went
do not stir her rest ;
but he will find a crowd to follow him !
ne'er looks to heaven amidst his gorgeous feast ,
kindled anew thy dark - bright eyes .
there is a pit of shame ,
good and happy becomes . my hermann shall not be upbraided ,
monument on the roadside by the gate of potidaea . but the
" oh , can it be ? you !
by plates of ir'n , which o'er the shield were laid :
and , like elisha 's spirit , gain
tobolsko , 2d february .
hags of darkness , hence ! away !
she pinned a bandage that was crossed ,
deceit the rage - embitter'd smile refines ,
how would the frozen stream of action cease !
near the waterfall and whirlpool ,
' twixt girth and bloody heel ,
pealing loud as rolling thunder ,
unto the others , meanwhile , the pastor had made explanation .
our father works in us ,
_ mephistopheles . _ o yes , my gentleman finds all child 's play !
for the weather changes with the moon .
o god ! i cried , grant all may be fulfilled !
goodman and goodman 's wife , pert polly ,
and halted at a hermit 's humble cell :
first half of the sixteenth century is a period of
residing at santa cruz , san christoval de laguna , and port
please note the hang -- both front and back ,
as sins upon papyrus , writ
life is but a day at most ,
who treads in passion 's footsteps here below ,
how souls go forth from me ; nor how they come
as if she heard her bards again ;
for him , a youth to whom was given
was all his home , whence weary and bowed and white
thy fled soul find her soul again .
he fell ; his fiery coursers at the sound
_ that o nyght were hire gest . ' _
found nothing but sorrow await her ;
when the most holy suffer'd .   then the words
from error 's thralldom .   where is now the ice ?
i did not wince or weep .
to curve in foliations prodigal
amigos y deudos
adam the goodliest man of men since borne
with glory 's diadem .
e’en in those wilds i could not rest ,
of states and people fretting at his yoke .
and honeybees had lost their stings ,
what melancholy pictures he was showing !
" ' oh , the poor lame weaver !
the last twist of the knife .
' to - morrow is our wedding - day ,
matchless , but with th ' almighty!--and that strife
and walnuts scatter
that day among the cabbages !
as we hastened on to reach a vast rock , from whose summit we were
he sometimes comes to me ,
touched was her haughty heart , once hard and curst ,
but should the gods in safety bring me home ,
as claude might have gaz'd on , or roussin pourtray'd ,
while she , far off , sits weeping ' neath her trees ?
the town - made blacking for their shoes :
while , in england , good fighting 's a pastime so hard to gain ,
i 've travell'd half my worldly course ;
pushing the satyr off the part that closes ,
this yonge lord ladde up on hih
your brave migration out of paradise ;
as if a fate hung in the midst of us ,
first may the yawning earth her bosom rend ,
the people of the house will hear our very breath !
or , " wife , is this your man ? "
its flower crowned head from out the seething waves,--
her nipples lyke young blossomd jessemynes .
and where she came , the lips that pain made strait
that circumcision in the males should imp
to bear it to the height where prayers arrive ,
him .   he complained that , as his affairs grew desperate , he found
our faces in the common clay .
a thousand times more ! "
and offered us his palanquin :
where birds are all singing from morning till night ?
when blest with that release desired ,
you could n't cross the black - soil plain --
as the moon moves , loving the world ; and seen
the beast is laid down in his lair ,
as lives the lily tender ruth ,
betwixt astrea and the scorpion sign ,
" on yonder bough he trims his wings ,
take her head upon your knee .
" full and swollen is every sail ;
issued at christmastide m.c.m .
or mix a draught , or bleed , or blister ;
oh hasten dear,--now i am strong ,
yet issue pardons , oaths , and proclamations ,
the fragrant crimson beating through
soon as my spirit , from her airy flight
aft may i meet the morning dew ,
now he is something anyone can be .
winter , with his wrinkles old ,
one moment ; then the swan - necked prow
on the plains of lapland 's children .
to fernë halwes , kouthe in sondry londes ;
and so i 'll trespass on your patience now no more ,
for everything red .
on the contrary , such the " _ chaste _ notions " of food
i probed the sore as thy disciple should :
wrath of zeus , lest haply he be angered and bear hard on
" oft from sensation quick volition springs ,
thus still let song attend
for summer now reigned as queen .
max and maurice feel an ache
out of dredd darknes of the deep abysme ,
in the next valley - glades :
sweeping a stretching circle from the eye ;
when i was young and fair was she ,
i passed her on the crowded street--
from organ comes , so comes before mine eye
o'er the blue backs of the billows ,
bring them here to scadra or bojana :
anywhere but straight ahead ... i had no
for tyranny is an incestuous queen ,
one under austria 's banners
all his care was his service well to saine ,
god 's peace within thy breast--
and we all became , with the world 's acclaim ,
all night , with eyes aware of loftier life ,
for most men in a brazen prison live ,
had each a head of tempered steel possest ,
there were no birds to fly .
fumantemque padum , cycnum plumamque senilem
had track'd in carnage thitherwards their way ;
again the thunder roars , my life is shaken as i listen ,
with heart so warm and eyes so bright ,
no sweet reunions day by day .
why wilt thou mock me still ?
the winds to marathon the virgin bore :
out of the night and the north ;
to coin the very sun to gold .
of nature , with that homely face ,
should pass that way and hear us laughing low
on rupert , his first - born , dishonour'd by " play " ?
and , lapped in pleasure , slumbers yet .
what care i how fair she be ?
and the east - wind was his breath .
a visitin ' a feller 's home ,
when from the herald 's waking trumpet comes
poor wretch ! he had enough to bear ,
untired and defenceless ; around them
the wild wind raves , the tide runs high ,
and as the sun goes under
come round him and smooth his furry bed ,
adnuit dexter deus et secundo
these folys use theyr lewde condicions
mildred m. cummer , of buffalo , n.y . , who is also a writer .
such a silver peal !
like orchard blossoms , apple , pear and plum ,
merged in all beauty .
tho ' it warmeth my heart to see
swells their bold hearts , and strings their nervous arms ,
lies dry and hard -- nay , leaps like a young horse
and gaue so cleere a luster to our fame ,
of all our miseries and strife ; -
wher that he mai noght wel aryse .
repentance offered ecstasy in pain .
parrat protests , ' tis he , and only he , 401 .
fade into the setting sun ,
in the whole of this block there is n't a tot
let śuka , rávaṇ ’s spy , be freed . ”
a shriek of human agony .
that lion - lord whose noble bed
upon the vapour of the dew
from whom are all things in their essence .
but ' tis larger than a fisher 's . "
backed by orlando , angry knight and bold .
of well - trained voices , singing chorus ;
the sole attendant on our genial bower ) .
with whom he shar'd his thoughtes , _ and did commend _
you know , my friends , with what a brave carouse
and thei of perse upon the chace
and whom , withholding aid , he minishes ,
stand by me and secure the throne .
watch it spinning , heart suspended ,
i 'm only a little toy dough - boy ,
in carlisle where he suffers for his faut ,
infuriate flame ? wherefore , the man who feigns
making my still heart
for every mind .   thus happiness hath root
love is enough .
enlightenment , the popularity of democratic ideas , the wilkes
but rest you this night with me here ; my bed,--we will share it
lacquer we learn by : cast in firing - pot ,
god send the that waye ryght!aeuro(tm )
mas on hiȝt ovir his hede for hete of the sone ,
" ah ! " begged each silly , pouting leaf ,
his paines , his povertie , his sharpe assayes ,
close to the servants ' room ,
“ well , we might change , ” his mother thought ;
" thine is furrowed with despair .
aríshṭanemi ’s son,(781 ) the king
with a throbbing , thrilling flame ;
but , " i ai n't out for jokes , " sez ' e
that tweedle - dum 's not tweedle - dee !
like an antelope he bounded ,
the house of days with arabesques
and so full , it spills over !
your nut ,
vallombrosa ! of thee i first heard in the page
farther off than other men ; they may find occasion of laughter in
and leap out full length , as we 're wanting you to?--
ah , but you know where i may find him , marian .
to the copper - bearing mountain ,
then , o'er him in the cradle laid ,
when i perceived the embankment round about ,
a son of thine , o gama , now shall hold
ye who are living every cause refer
whom i woo , a fragrant thing
when they flagged our train because of a broken rail ,
what cares he ? he can not know ;
thou fain wouldst know if with another service
infect young hearts around , and check the growth
the flaming brand is passed .
to bow out god and hand the devil in.--
i bend and watch the grackles billing ,
whilst tyburn for such slaves does groan ,
far south , my flowers , not here -- not here ?
and the proud mother thought
thou wants my vote , young man wi ' t ' carpet - bags ,
of golden panoply , refulgent host ,
on earth with eyes like thine .
then with uplifted hands , and eyes devout ,
tame and free - livers ;
both of the singing , and the flaming forth
stood for a time absorbed in thought
o'er all lands leap , crushing ,
till the buyers are half bewildered
in the grand tier .
al specheles and on the gras
shook from her plumes a downy shower .
their scent survives their close ,
whom he knows false , abide and rule the house :
making thee equal to thy destiny .
the purest ray , where all is bright ,
our minds to dare , and gives the ready fires .
should we have yet more ado , for then must we divide among
good robin hood he could glide ;
all but the one , sole , haunting dream
beamed a soft glory through the place .
for close upon him follow'd horse and man ,
a stage arrives ; but scarcely deigns to stop ,
she will hear just one , half - smothered sigh ;
than those of the epic or satiric poetry of the period . a further
adieu ye vales , ye mountains , streams , and groves ,
and ( as her townsmen aye were wo nt to greet
you may descry ; the sky 's tranquility ;
to do my best from dawn of day till night ,
" comrades all , that stand and gaze ,
more rapid than the motion , which first girds
across moon - misted squares clamoured his fleet
the gods brought me nigh to the isle of ogygia , where
to serve , not suffer , strengthen , not invade ;
will never give us cause for shame ,
the faithless sovereign , scandal to the gods ,
landlady , count the lawin
she slid the bolts back of the outer doors ,
are new , yet a varied surface and nothing under .
with purple of too rich a red :
she was not deep , nor eloquent .
flown with the red insurgence of the vine .
that errour now , which is become my crime ,
thus , mighty prince , his counsel laid
es schienen so golden die sterne ,
tireless in the wood - rose thicket ,
( who , questioned of their wages , answered , ' sir ,
his disch , his coppe , his drinke , his mete ;
reader !   i would not that amaz'd thou miss
to make the boatmen fishing - nets , or help'd
old and serious , brown and big .
still men know ,
they are castilians all .
but long - time dreamed , and out of trouble wrung ,
alas , too late ! though quick , and sharp ,
for flattery , when a woman 's heart its aim ,
on the second thou canst rest thee
the eyes , whose light one can not see ,
to rest from wonders ? other wonders rise ;
i thread the crowded street ;
nor seetheless were the danaans in the fray :
take their sources in the tomb !
the sacrament of song died in a sob .
“ albeit indeed i dare not take
and ecstasy .
the windings of my life are all
talents differ ; all is well and wisely put ;
so that the reader need be at no loss to comprehend the whole
and thus the face denoting by the beard ,
and my tiny self i see ,
render this term “ afflicting , ” but if , as is more probable , it is
and everything assume
on holidays may tell , that such a feat was done :
always the fact shall perish
the sword , still ready , thirsting still to strike ,
in his plumes the breeze of morning
glow'd in her cheek , and yet she felt no wrong .
shot his shining quills , like arrows ,
trembling amidst new thoughts , he sent a ray
have suffered ?   or my city , or daughters shamed ?
never in any place such goodly tree
in thriving phera ; rich in substance he ,
its lust , its greed , its covert purposes ,
acted upon the living as on wire ,
whereat the gallant giselher / straight the minstrels brought
where ten heroes were not living ,
that killed the rat
when he talk dat way
if ye will read aright , and pardon me ,
known to all ages by the lady 's name .
how , in crowds together massed ,
and as ' is mare just cleared the rail
mount tabor and zion re - echoed afar
in his cell so lone and cold .
meet ;
thou art the heaven to which my soul would go !
into the deep flood !
with madness , and unwonted reverie :
of verse , only a half truth about homer can be told , but
the brown leaf flutters where the green leaf died ;
like one with hornets in his hair .
but one , a man , who is man and nothing more ,
a lurid mark and dread to see ;
fare ye well , ye streams and lakelets ,
an ' i 'll run oop to the brig , an ' that thou'll live to see ;
and blundered in . with puzzled , patient face
seemed lent me by the sunny power
to watch her love 's returning .
whose garments were border'd with spinach ;
and " so conclude ! "
ephialtes is his name ; he showed great prowess .
like echoes from an angel 's song ;
my power shall all their force restrain .
where are the doctors who were nobly fired
downwards , by pass , defile , and black ravine ,
as ' twere a snake , by all , for mortal foe ,
which smiteth most the most exalted summits ,
within thine arms
the western wind was wild and dank wi ' foam ,
thou and thy sons ' sons shall have peace with power .
godávarí the best of streams ,
be cause first of a sad and then of a good gift . we turned our
from my heart . "
but paddl’d on mi way ;
swoln mightier than a sea , him struggling holds ? "
of terror of the angel of the lord .
himself is his own dungeon .
say the bells of st . helen 's .
of their old piety , and of their glee :
" an ' stopped it wi ' a curse .
i was n't very well .
she 's broke away before they rung the bell ;
so stood i , by an atmosphere beguiled
the height of that prosperity
what man o'er one old thought would pore and pore ,
he followed , till they reached the vaulted cave ,
although our " must - be 's , " " shall - be 's , " idle seem ,
_ gleyde _ , an old horse .
honour 's thirst , that blood will slake ;
which makes the dulcet psalter of the world 's desire .
heart , he dashed on to williamsburg .
but had i wist , before i kist ,
the moon once more o'erhangs her wat'ry couch ,
and all must pay the same , or soon or late
to yow , my fader , i confesse ,
with the shade of earth and heaven ,
walking by the sentry - boxes ,
more than two hours aloft : and to the sea
and i , what is my crime , i can not tell ,
and dirty breast bared to the sun ;
for jesus christ , your saviour , was born this happy night ;
there is none to proclaim ;
yet louder than the sorrow ,
shal neither been y - writen nor y - songe
woe 's me ! thy lordship and thy deeds hast thou forgotten quite ?
of { the } scyldings ’ lord ;
also , they was drilled by ' alberdiers ;
there be two men of all mankind
the whole great stretch of london lie ;
and to the right hand turning , other care
peeps out,--and if there comes a shower of rain ,
the bobolink laughs in the meadow ;
looms forth and glooms
books afford consolation to the troubled mind by substituting a
promise she had made .
the rocks gave back a sound like thunder . )
are but three bounds , and look , sir , at this last !
his faulchion , and against rinaldo pressed ,
changing the charactry
in thy soft eyes .
" on which the multitude
the danes ' unconquer'd offspring march behind ,
to make without misgiving
( terrible , or sweet , or puny ) ;
" sweet , " said the angel , as she gave
these that we loved shall god love less
in haste his pencil , that he might note down
or we the past forget ,
and the deuce knows what we may do--
on more than one , find not one friend .
brooded above and gladdened to his sight ;
or the need so great as to - day .
is dirty;--yet , allow that dirt its due ,
quickly silenced their derision .
let us live like two frenzied prayers straining
of centuries round thee lent a ray ,
to rest ; and what the garden choicest bears
spread at the saviour 's word
suppose you 're dressed for walking ,
vpon the king alanzon prest so sore ,
and there the king _ is _ but as the beggar .
how can he ever make things right ?
under the rainy deluge , with one side
it sweeps the land with icy breath ,
but often and often will memory go ,
for the raspberries of kalew ,
with the rivers ' flowing round ,
there fell such shade , our paths seemed laid
ah that my mouth for muses ' milk were fed
undaunted , undismayed , our gallant john
long ago to thee i gave
his winter sides against heavens threats .
in winding paths , hard by the ripe wheat - field ,
then i said softly to myself ,
must redeem our loss ;
why , she ran me for a month ,
with lifted hand i looked upon them
but last year 's bitter loving must remain
of branching lights sets off the changeful charms
clung to her companion:--scalding tears
drinking in beauty from the summer moon ,
sarga the seventh -- krishna supposed false
i answer her : the choice is mine -- ah , no !
where a woman 's laugh is born,--
exin compellare pater me voce videtur
this heath , this calm and quiet scene ,
shall strengthen earth 's weak ones with courage again .
house of hades is a port that no ship can reach . '
out of the mouths of turbines ,
con voz dulce y melodiosa ,
so comprise the heavenly bodies
it never makes at all .
thus atticus , and trumbull thus retired .
girl of the red mouth ,
out then spak her father dear ,
tell me true , without evasion ,
and loud your drums may beat .
thou still wilt cozen me .
and i 'll place it in her breast ,
from day to day .
ah , these fair woods the spirit crosses ,
of noble raymond from his tender eild ,
i think her name is joy .
the lybic hammon shrinks his horn ;
to such a worthi prince as he .
( to fill up his pocket -- all one had to do ,
untamed and hard to tame , but strong to toil ,
" one hero find in all your vaunting train ,
we like sepulchral statues lay ;
you drunken , poaching , boozing brute , you .
ne'er stepped on medder grass .
self - repeating idea .
without wrong ;
who call and take some favorite tome ,
for laughing at jack 's disaster .
nay , where in courts he must contend ,
thus many a sad to - morrow came and went ,
ascending , cried : " haste thee , for see the sun
who      mercy       art ,
and we , his children , truly we
and then descended
that ever from her brother 's stock should grow
" oh mother webtoes , only look , "
three legacies , already half possess'd :
sir , english maidens do ; and i am plighted
they meet again , each widowed sound
places i love come back to me like music--
that will we d to - morrow .
_ minstrels and maids , stand forth on the floor . _
that murmur which a minstrel draws
' o ho ! o ho ! ' tis noon i say .
plush breeches next , in crimson dyed ,
blande et docte percontat , aenea quo pacto
still as i gazed , i beheld where stood
more bent anglantes ' champion to pursue ;
and there were the lodges below , each with its door alight ;
begor ! this fête all balls does bate
suffer not nature 's glory to decay .
sing the glorious day 's renown ,
imitate when we please ? this desart soile
and half to the rising day ;
to hear me sing
we are bowed to the earth , we are broken and bent ,
for full reuenge into that fury grew :
e'en when the chant has ceased .   their home itself
a smile that shone as death may shine
" upon the western sea - maid 's urn--
" why else should such loud sorrow through all the people spread ?
then , as they break , the slaves of care reprove ,
the girls go down the lane
she drew back with a cry , as four grim faces ,
to where the rays were slanting into day .
poised where , behind earth 's rim , the sun has set .
without the porch , one summer noon ,
to hit the sense of human sight .
from all the rest , of whom to be invok'd ,
their height in heaven comforts not ,
as a symbol of defiance lo ! the wilderness i span ;
my part in her is doubled . "
but stay'd . her crime straightway she firmly press'd ,
in the cataract 's foaming torrent ,
and said , " no more by sea , by land ,
whole fields of golden - rod can not offset
feared lest the buckler 's light should be impaired ,
but men by keen debating move
sways and swings as the thrush goes hurrying by .
as he which is his nexte liche
the lambton links are just like hell .
him i see burning in these countless suns ,
if all we see , on man must rise ,
and my true love cried " who knocks ? " and i said
baith doe and roe and hart and hind
his nose ,
the wind is stirring ,
" no golden guerdon;--his reward shall be
but now , with pangs of keen remorse , i rue
how arden loved his child!--how spoke that love
the ruby shone in deep unholy fire .
and other scrolls whose writings did unbind
for the angels of jacob are guarding it still ;
soon as the morn , in orient purple dress'd ,
so many men , such heaps of dead espies ,
for fear our solid aim be dissipated
that wings the death of torture to the heart ,
are quiet when they will .
assay it on some one of the table round ,
of the old house of leo degenerate scion .
could overcome in me the zeal i had
that the whirling buckler scatter'd wide a shower
who became an infant small ;
of the young , happy , blushing bride ,
waiting till the gallants come , singing from the play ;
spread like a leafy sea around .
her tale doth tell ,
for cities these may do ;
rides off downhill into the wood .
and these were the simple words she sung
and hertes hye that hawteyn be by pryde
thou saidst , " i love thee ! " i would straightway cry ,
to faded cheeks their wonted hue .
for she hears she has lost -- and for ever--
braver than the brave ?
festival of zeus . persephone being left alone is carried off by
the rich enamel sunbeam - kist !
what change in thee the song , and what my smile
be health around it ever spread ,
thyself prepare to pass the vale of night
is grown right eerie now she 's done it ,
until archaeologists came with their kits
when first i saw her , not of earth ,
nor of the eloquence within
the vesper - eve , dolorously we part ! "
from a far - off farm - house , seen near the hills
for each man eats his fav'rite meats ,
pausing , before her beauteous face she held
her dear - bought freedom wrest frae thee .
the forest shall conquer ! the forest shall conquer !
ye lambent flames of the soul , her offspring fires :
and think that life is fleeting fast ,
for sinon in his fire doth quake with cold ,
in koln , a town of monks and bones ,
while rolling threescore years and one
where souls with sacred hunger sighing
than any cordon bleu .
at times like this , that overset the scale
and part their hot hands stained with grasses and flowerstalks
northward over drontheim ,
and fast their cohorts rally on the field .
the mighty joy you feel .
now had the sun withdrawn his radiant light ,
till i well ez i kin be ,
one harvest from thy field
curtiss . and of the eternal mutton -- chop in the morning .
fringing the dusty road with harmless gold ,
“ and wither'd limbs , shall to small substance waste ;
from the deep , on wings of flame uplifted ,
flowerets , faded , to the ground .
and the throb wherein those old lips met
from the maiden 's nimble fingers ,
bring me lemons too , and sugar ;
“ and wondering that more swift he ran than wo nt ,
until that glance run in the world 's despite
chorus -- ance crowdie , twice crowdie ,
with such a deep , wild bliss ;
i can not bear their eyes .
high up the saviour 's holy mountain .
unheeded . lo ! his godly art of change ,
burst the locks with frequent blow :
the youth with instruments surround the fire :
young peterkin he cries ;
his ashes make a horrid noise
whan that i here the smale foules singe ,
the far valleys were sprinkled with tiny lights .
to check her heart 's quick beating ,
so when the cruel march is done , an ' when the roads is blind ,
swift his broad falchion fierce peneleus spread ,
henceforth , when a cab thou takest ,
as our actions make them so . "
the while the heifers ' bells about him rang
to name it right .   there 's somethin' yet .
where hyacinths bring down to earth the sky .
yester e’en at sir bugge ’s gate
nor need i to envy our braw gentle focks ,
in the breaking of bridges
she lies , the glory of the world ,
up to the summit of one peak , he fix'd
to mould him to the kind parental hand ;
that lieth in the mould .
swift o'er the waters bore him ,
“ dar'st thou hope ought beyond ? perceiv'st thou not
even such a beauty as you master now .
and cast a dazed and puzzled look around ,
wherever we wander ae vision aye fills
where poised gemmed dragon - flies ;   and sudden moans
" where is she ? " i said :
for all this judith now rendered
was in his plaited brow : yet , his eyelids
shines from your empty eye - holes ,
with a sugar stick !
by a flood of crimson rain .
and finding his progress arrested by the rock , stood stupidly
" now is the roe - buck taken ! "
this have i said because it must grieve thee . "
pledged to the plain , after a pace or two ,
detrahere et pellem nitidus qua quisque per ora
in thy bonds , nor mourn in spirit that men should dwell in heaven
lead on , my son , i yield and follow on thy way . '
she walk out on de groun ' .
pelides , glorious chief , with other spoils
" i , not so much for deadly hate i bear
now marshall'd all beneath their several chiefs ,
that the spells he might discover ,
owl against robin .
a thousand years their cloudy wings expand
divine achilles view’d the rising flames ,
and he uttered a summoning shout and called on the clan to rise .
for that 's the only sport for me ,
her clustering curls the hyacinth displays ;
to witness !   such the faith which fortune kept
already she this portion hath bequeathed ,
is it not true ?
from sleep awakes the cheerful swain ;
the mad course goes across the silent plain ,
the oak - tree , not the vine .
my fancied good , and brought substantial ill !
thou'lt we d my daughter , and thou'lt fight with me . "
" hope not on earth to enjoy the blessing more . "
even there are the martyrs ' rugged cairns--
and the memories dear of the good old game .
passing where the shepherds
they fell as thick as harvests beneath hail ,
beethe hevy ageyne , or elles mote i die !
perchance his wound is deep ; she listens long ;
all o - kis - ko 's love and courage
sudden , in the savage crowd ,
let but my fainting heart be blest
quite through the body , stuck him to a tree ;
i 'll steal a kiss though i be riven ,
little a linking of the hand to you !
your great brow seemed beethoven 's
were mottled from the needle 's scar where she
the heavy iron bells !
drew out the strong thread from the carded wool ,
and yet at last her long loue robe he found
" there the great man vouchsafed in turn to each
when albion 's lessening shores could grieve or glad mine eye.[gh ]
of the great herd , that near him stall'd ; whence found
says dibdin 's ghost to me .
  & in wast{er}ne walk
while round me grouped my squires all stood . "
quick beauty , loud refrain ,
hic tot in audaces ungue vel ore feras ?
and tell your mother it was n't i.
sailing to the dark pohyola :
salió una niña al balcón
and this because they in their days have had
once lost , can ne'er be found again ,
oh ! we may build a fairy home for love--
into a reverie .
never until we conquer the uncouth
ισονομους τ ’ αθηνας εποιησατον .
  a badge of merit is a most honourable distinction , as the reward
of the third death tell me truly . "
how much will he suffer and fight ?
' tis the heart to love , and the soul to feel :
cutty , pipe .
o ! do n't you wish that you were me ?
mother , come back from the echoless shore ,
warmly i pray your leave against that host ,
was cold ; and cold the bosom his hand pressed .
many a shady resonant arbour -- many a deep and wondrous glen ;
but that was twenty years ago .
my soul with endless sorrow is possess'd . "
as when yon cloudless , quartered moon
all germs of pure and world - wide purposes .
then i remember'd , yester - eve
el hombre está entregado
but many a million english hearts some love for you shall feel .
in tuscan wilds now let them villas rear
with reddened cheeks , brightened eyes ,
sons of the laurel who press to your meed ,
i wo n't cut me one dem stick
in gardens of my memory .
now in this hour of waking
thus only should it come , if come it must ;
when to enshrine his reliques in the sun 's
the trail was taken up next day
had found them weeping , but minerva check'd
snowed o'er with daisies,--flower by all beloved ,
with beauty , sense , and every work of art :
morning : a woman looking on the sea ;
" on my word ,
but when he learned to talk , he came
i promise faithfulness no other lips may keep ;
of the danish king :   good courtier he !
angelical , disporting in their sphere .
trusting there to see a maiden
aloud , saying :
pleasant was the air above him ,
the song of atonement , the suppliant 's psalm,--
of home - return .   away !   achilles soul
this time thou criest in vain , " my lord replied ;
than cicero , whose every breath was fame :
under amazement of their hideous change .
he continued , with a slow smile and an affected air
where mary 's lovely garden grows :
you see , my dear sir , what a punctual correspondent i am ; though ,
out of the shambles that men built
  _ antaeus _ : is to be asked to lift them over the wall , because ,
how could i crowd my dungeons dark and low
who left argosto dead on gascon meads ;
displaced by fiery deserts , mountains ruing
you would not hear me if i told you more ,
forever from of old men have been so :
sly opal , cloaking with a mist
his swift pursuers from heav'n gates discern
by hawks oft affrighted away have fled ;
of gems and rich attire ,
strained eyeballs -- cry that mother dear
sandals in his hands and bound them beneath his feet and
milk and curds and butter ,
ha ! the little rogue , i caught her
and what do ye say then?--that spring long departed
pass . yea and the old man , the lord halitherses son of
the strength
emerges as he goes .
hang the cage of birds you bring there ,
an ' he is but a fusionless carlie , o.
a man and woman stand -- he , strong and fair ,
was shouting : " lano , were not so alert
the money for her training . for he saw
go where elysian vales your steps invite ,
his ewes are in the fauld ,
and we trimmed our kitchen eden , swapping
and not alone you kept your banners flying,--
but our thoughts they were palsied and sere--
the morning was fine , and -- breakfast despatched--
there yet were many weeks before she sail'd ,
wherefore i turned me to my counsel sage .
at khara ’s feet the monster bent .
and the stern , destiny - brought stranger ,
something about -- to honour and obey -
a rose -- of her lyric face .
but facts in proof are manifest for each :
back to the start , -- a thriftless thrift of ants
rocks .   his mother could not indeed infect others with the same
and crystal clear the sunlit deeps thereof ;
the ruddy host divine !
he slyly from his wife did steal ,
with every virtue crowned .
that levels the larches and pines ,
low croon
their clothes are colors that softly gleam .
in a pious , breathless state
of threescore souls , the only three remaining--
could we tear out those pages?"--
which therefrom takes its life and potency . and as a hill mirrors
took him in and set him down , and strewed beneath him thick
and all the doors will yield to him who tries ,
but heaven , that brings out good from evil ,
' heaven bless you ! '   oh , to have back then stepp'd
and a lake with icy waters .
stand drinkin ' deep the pride o ' state :
if now , as formerly he trod
the dews and sunshine of the skies ,
` for , nece , by the goddesse minerve ,
so , past all parting , i should claim thee mine .
by th ' all - wise eternal one ,
prima donna 's sore on me ;
jes ever ' shape and build and style
in adria weds his green - hair'd bride ;
he sees a bulle with hornnes .
at morning light the strangers / had wrought high deed of fame ,
he takes a lot of beatin ' , and the other day we tried ,
beware of the beautiful temptress , my son ;
thou would be found deep drowned in doon ;
well let him watch ; he shall be trepanned .
winter was gone ; the myriad shoots of green
the place which thou alone canst fill .
so saying , he drew nigh , and to me held ,
in the dark earth where you 've been
the birds began to sing .
which unite in murmurs often ,
his doubts remained unstirred .
of thickest covert was inwoven shade
ne toward me you re ere encline .
that vows to the vulgar sun ; oh , rare ,
requited : ephialtes him they call .
porrectusque nouem tityos per iugera terrae
through travelling rain and mist
and tolde him the condicion ,
this is the library ; note well the books ,
then he wrapped with skilful fingers
to themselves yet either - neither ,
_ hor . _   now thracian chloe governs me ,
about my person , the more easily
over the night like an ecstasy--
vuélveme presto , carillo ,
evidence of hero - triumphs ;
alarm the drowsy youth from slumbering nod :
antilochus ! the man lives not on earth
and why ? for seven and thirty years :
the other to the altar 's god .
spices shall burn on it , and by their pale smoke curled ,
her loveliness i never knew
sang his song for six months running ,
when men in congress come to blows at something someone said ,
not a sail , without her leave ;
and men will mark our upward trend
the works of oliver goldsmith . edited by peter cunningham ,
' tis the mind that shines in ev'ry grace ,
who art more fair
" attractive attitudes !   dress by the right !
farther on , a cloudlet hanging ;
and " ship ahoy ! " a hundred times a day ;
foes flee , your battle trumpet dreading .
so loud , it hath no likeness here : nor i
was weapon enough , now leading such a squadron ,
as in an artist 's gallery ?
believes in part , despite his will .
where those whom thou didst love in dust repose ,
keeps the room in roars of laughter
each one then almanzor greeted ,
itself astride a cross - road dubiously ,
but shall not , as i judge , till the earth hide
and a fool awaits an answer .
" sparrer , why not you ? "
while bending like your arched brows o'er your eyes .
that reports had been spread which he did not deserve ;
while the smith named ilmarinen ,
bleeding with thorns of petty strife ,
and said , " bethink thee , tydeus ' son , betimes
is here . and one thing the god will give and another
" i will not mind the wet . "
to worship at the great white throne ,
him i shall never welcome back , returned home to his own
or flash of fluttering drapery .
save of the skaiter 's heel , and there is laid
fly - leaves , providential increase of , 416 .
whom of unequalled affability
languages of this country . they were transmitted to him more than
that stirred long race - wars betwixt states and states .
has received its invitation .
the dauber was the first man over the rail .
accingunt gladiis , triste canit tuba :
i chant the new empire grander than any before , as in a vision it
oh , mulligan 's bar was the deuce of a place
their cottage - mess , and the assistant swains
and think they say
of my existence , and as yet would not
her tender breast , as white , as pure , as chaste;---
and loud the black - eyed indian maidens laugh ,
was still in conclusion to multiply riches :
reflects the invulnerable rock .
thy heart will sink in blank despair ,
" the goddess flown--
another 's hand to right her ?
abstaining from attachment to the work ,
but it seems to come from a tomb .
the favorite comes!--but draws no more the admiring eye .
with just the same religious look
former leaves to the latter to discover for itself the three
a deep philosopher , whose rules
by all the griefs his thoughts could frame ,
be this our motto , then : we 'll try
imagination or illustrated by an unusually pleasing ecstatic
i doubted if i should ever come back .
the arabs have poured down , to waste the plain ;
the winds of heaven mix for ever
a sigh from my bessy shall plead then above ,
verdure growing from our dust , whose sight will it
the proudest form , the best compacted force ,
he will not overtake them , haste he e'er so greatly back ,
and , awful as a present deity ,
where angry winds and tempests fierce abide .
hi - ding do .
listen and save !
to draw and hold each listener ; while a certain
yet here , this night , you might repose with me ,
until at last they were compelled
the sling with slender smoothened thong she drave about her head
then do not fear , my boy ! for thee
guessing their lot ;
when the tinkle - tinkle heard this he was glad with a new strange
come away , come away ,
thine is no piracy , whate'er men say ,
lend the bishop 's port a zest .
over an ocean of great content .
we shall see him ; but in heaven ,
but still the sky was bountiful and blue
quiet , basking in the sunbeams
in vain for ' um you 'll sarch ;
of othre men , if thou miht hiere
great boulders basking in the noonday heat ,
" this light is worth the work , " said he .
a man , for aye removed
active agents is his bunting .
but to the world at large would only own
watch'd through the hush the earth 's young mother -- spring !
no mark to part the squire and lord .
hastens forth the seeds to scatter ,
a floating citadel , with walls of pine ,
to noroway o'er the faem ;
wherof i mihte take lore ,
when i to spread my feeble eyes begun :
in her far - off home :
a monumental tree , alone ,
instant , the initiate 's trials were prepared,--
thou art the torturer of the brave !
his eyebrows kept their sable hue .
and leave the moon - path free for all my thoughts
sudden i hear , far , far above those clouds ,
this feverish breast no phantom - bliss can cool ,
an can not tack more in . ”
aliquid nos _ de _ bellicorum danorum      quomodo danorum
waits upon the daylight and his great emprise .
than it eludes the hound .
whose very deadly bite will be
but one lock for me of their precious wool ,
an ample foss , that in a bow was bent ,
but time had set her pechin ' sair ,
see , how toward it with desire i bend . "
and that one talent which is death to hide
that would have mock'd the sense of pain
i scarce can trust their witness .
then burning ghauts and crimsoned peaks ,
the following outline of one of his " sermons " will afford a good
i am to pay , and in what kind . " so said ,
her wit in boxes was my lord 's delight .
the bases of cosmical structure : some mention
and with śatrughna forth he fared .
ay , here it is .
how failed his courage in a swoon of fright !
kindles another , provided that its flame appear outwardly ;
that danc'd to the lark 's early song ?
please will green do
aboon their heads to flee ;
the dainty tints that oft appear
paul robert 's article in the _ dawn _ suggests
and went out , like a guy ;
falls a victim to the angler ,
of mother earth and the enduring sun .
for thee to stay ;
but now her pride may let itself down ,
while him the greeks with fun'ral rites shall grace . "
but we were dressed for winter ,
( ah , woe is me ! was it for thee ,
the green leaf o ' loyaltie 's beginning for to fa ' ,
flake after flake--
wishes _ are _ horses , as i understand .
i feel the light that hath enamored me .
what were the word , or the deed
it gives me great vexation ;
the stars fade out where the moon comes ,
have you thought there could be but a single supreme ?
as angry shearers galloped by ,
which answered for a table grand ,
so fain he wolde his tresor kepe ;
she learns with careful hand to sew ,
let us raise the song of soul
and while she drew it up and down the stone ,
and dipped my hand in water , to feel cold ,
will he take back that strength he has given ,
far as thou mayest , he be nor ta'en nor slain . '
and thus i mot algate leve
for i ' ve found it worse than folly to be sad , john brown ;
till bullets clipt an angle ,
diction ; and so the helpless little fellow is again
my words below to thee , and make thee hear--
girt with a throng of revellers , bent his way
please , hush thy noisy song a little while .
it seems there is another veering fit ,
mr . lamb in red lion street perks up his head ,
but i ca n't measure my devotion !
the king therto yaf his assent ,
god drops no nobler anchorage on earth ,
is still the mother - heart that hears no more
why our great expectation should be called
_ the dust derived from thence -- doth it not lie _
turn ye all the heels afore ,
and now before my face the rogues begin
avenging dread ones , gods that guard elissa perishing ,
these were keys wherewith he opened ,
the brown and white rats , and the black ones from norway ,
seen as the eddying sparks retire .
come , lovely may !
oft under long - neglected cribs , or lurks
for silent , though he greeted her , she stood
hurriedly she asked the reason :
when he crossed the bridge into medford town .
like a spirit paced before .
to don that unbecoming evening - dress
( denied narcissa ) wish'd them all a grave .
thus while i hear her prattle words ,
the cattle call ; one treads the tangled weed
so swiftly went his charger / that none could him outrun ;
crowned were they , in such glorious raiment clad ,
the graceful naiad 's smiling band
and from black clouds the lightning flashes break .
" dream faces " better than us all .
ghastly thing ,
to rule this mighty nation .
the voice of chearful labour filled the dale ;
some thousands crippled , and a myriad dead--
but though a moment there his hard heart faltered ,
weary with joy , and reconciled
great drops of blood on lanká fall .
of bride - grooms , brides , and of their bridal - cakes .
the depths intently sound ;
of that colossal wreck , boundless and bare
flying slowly , looking round her ,
each gift of nature and of art his own ;
dost thou endure thus ?
so hold und schön und rein :
not to thee has strength been given ,
above this " world of passion and of lies " :
cunning , a selfless flinging of self in the fray ,
silence imposed upon that dulcet lyre ,
ganelon saw , laid hand upon his sword ,
up from the point , which vibrating obey'd
high o'er thy loftiest tower my flag display ,
their wondring eyes to fill ;
to think he sees the lord ?
if , of the mud he clears away ,
his helmet now shall make a hive for bees ;
and when the foul smokes pass ,
he was smashed by a car
invoke the sea gods , and invite the wind .
are fighting at our very ships through the cowardice of our
a thing that one enjoys .
canto xxv . the hermitage of love .
but well i know ye fear the rising town ,
silent , upon a peak in darien .
of sister birds , their pinions sounded too ;
who , sadder than for sorrows of their own ,
so that if fortune foil so fair a feat ,
radiant as dew , or ruby polish'd bright ,
the love of politicks so vulgar 's grown ,
to thebes , to athens , when he will , and where .
and buys with lavish hand his yearly store
beating with pained pulsations like a clock .
let there be patrons , patrons like to thee , i. 49 .
( because i have met him--
" sweet highland girl ! a very shower
the sun came up upon the left ,
as was that rome - borne _ tarquins _ lustfull fire :
when a frail and tender baby ,
such bonnets , mantles , ruffs , and puffs ,
press'd in his arms the pond'rous prey sustains ;
" to naughty man , for i abhor it . "
as if in some new wise
thus is one heat from many embers felt ,
talking of all their wants e'er they should start away .
and give them that counsel which old men have a right to give .
“ would that by me companion'd thou had'st gone .
whan al is do that was to done ,
fierce as the god of battles , urged his pace .
re - echoing their grandsires ' cry .
till the rough floods in peaceful channels flow'd ;
here ! take this purple robe and coronet ,
neither gap nor crevice through it ,
she was eight years old that day ,
quenched the fierce fever 's heat , defeated death ;
at his word , the hosts are in act to strike .
" in which case both are lost .
a safe return , though one escape my arm .
and even so i asked your love ,
y más allá colombia adormecida
for she look'd with such a look , and she spake with such a tone ,
for danger waits on all untimely joy .
nor cared to know its bane or bliss ;
  [ compare " the isles of greece , " stanza 7 ( _ don juan _ , canto
feeds her guests and bids them welcome ,
because a few men sold their souls
now these , now those , the surly boatman bore :
gave a second stroke ; his own throat ,
now tell me of some love - tokens
to show the splendid state in which you live .
had fixed him with the cæsars in his fate
with speedier motion , eyed us , as they pass'd ,
i noted not ( so busied was my thought )
speaking of things a woman ought to know .
by an ecstatic vision wrapt away ;
to cheat himself with mirth ;
the new poetry
achilles ’ self conduct her o’er the main ;
or sin provoke from fate , than this .
where all is pure and love - like ,
and hidden thoughts shall open lie and bare . "
as on thy cheek i sit and see
where breed the swallows , her melodious cry
unmindful that the thorn is near ,
rest - harrow , was it ? yes ; their tangled roots
an ' they say paid out shin - plasters t ' one o ' them old masters
a couple , and no more , in chat ;
" oh , you imp of all mischief ! " he cried , " come down here ;
“ the reason my cheek so pale is seen ,
forthwith uprose great ajax the son of telamon , and crafty
indeed , the waters of the deep
a face that can all hearts command ,
each joined him to his several guild ,
drugged with fumes of his nargileh ,
white as a flow'r in summer was his head .
and he kissed me where i stood ;
her life to one true heart , and with a glow
but when you hate to see it rain ,
’ mong chilling mists and snow . a spirit swift ,
so passing wonderful and fierce in show ,
to the elfin court must haste away ;
of violets and love till death--
her plain face grinning at the stir
if it were done already , would seem late .
inhale long draughts of this delicious breeze .
fast hold of natures strong and wise ;
no repining ;
so saying he roused the courage of them all
as were left me then so her lover , hugh ,
hold me again--
and thus accosted him:--
" and i the life you gave me , for your use
and my old head , stuffed with latinity ,
admire we , then , what earth 's low entrails hold , }
the chiefs were set ; the soldiers crown'd the field :
an ' she has twa sparkling roguish een .
with modest words , in gentle tone :
my naked soul arose to go ,
the even lines of sluices black
what toils vanquish , and what course to run . '
pasturing homeward , and compell'd them all
in heav'n - ward musings .   rich were the returns
blocks of stone all fiery glowing . "
when beside his sable pall ,
i downa bide to see the moon
i that do the talkin ' , and the little lad that sings ,
or else they 'll fly away .
in dust extended under ilion ’s wall ,
el alma que á tu alteza
was her prince in a diadem ;
no one now will take pity on me : resistance is all in vain .
be full of great dark meanings , like the sea ,
a door will always open ,
though stormy oceans round us roll ,
spring half the bliss , or rest of humankind !
" poems " , collected edition , in two volumes , 1916 .
which it had long stood under , streind to the highth
alas ! unlike the swarm of loves ,
and in the world as in the school
the glow of love i feel ,
i saw the parson tie the knots ,
grasping at the foaming billows ,
with rapture in their wonderment ; but these ,
when sleeping near to mother ;
as bleak - fac'd hallowmass returns ,
ennobled hath the buskin'd stage .
in sort of wakeful swoon , perplexed she lay ,
when , doubting on the bank if he shall run
here a pretty baby lies
and , smitten to the heart ,
he then wandered by the river ,
that her salvation is,--with scruples holy
that ever thou
so there new substances , methought began
lo nou , hou thilke time it ferde
que en las naves vivías ,
through the fingers of the blest !
the telegram said :
clothed in her vernal robes of old ,
i can follow the sooner away .
there are statues , too , of the good and great ,
nor whirlwind , thunder , earthquake , storm , or aught
her neighbours round esteemed her well ,
_ galba . _ o , appius , we offer thee our lives
shod with elfin silver were the steeds they bestrode .
i reck not , will he nill he / thy best warrior bold ,
flagrant and fragrant with strange deeds and dreams ,
then low i sighed , when grew thy beauty on my sight ,
hence the pale ruler with a love - sick eye
o what is that whimpering there in the darkness ?
and say't alike in cot and ha'--
his dear ones , the man and woman .   his wife brought forth a son
the midnight lamp , and book - bound knowledge learned ,
before the advent of the sun ,
in time - destroying infiniteness gift
but every body said , " quoth he ,
wonders greatly younger frater .
lead him ; say softly i shall chide his blindness ,
levelled aventicum , hath strewed her subject lands .
when overhead , the harvest moon rides full ,
hallan , a partition wall , a porch , outer door .
and caw their fierce surprise
but the sea - bride yieldeth
“ who dares awake the mother snake
that the porcupine sheds its quills ! "
for down to the start with her thorough - bred air
bring great æneas to the camp all covered with his blood ;
of castellated bluestone , paused to sweep
stole a pig and away he ran .
power of anything depends on its form , which is the principle of
for what sweet haven spread her weary wing ,
seeking thine airy food ,
bright tulips , we do know
by the cold hearth sits alone ,
promiscuous , and the cry ascends to heaven .
but by the weight oppress'd , so slowly came
so into greater jubilee were chang'd
high their robes upswaying ,
nor freshness of the flowers of may
where i and my love were wo nt to gae !
only the fact could make my story true . "
the sun!--why tarry then till comes the night ?
appeared content ; so that for this i saw not one dark mien . for
but , delia , more delightful still ,
on the satin back of the avalanche soft ,
but whom he hits without recure he dies ,
there 's a pathos in the solemn desolation
lay in thy son is buried in his grave .
performance , while he had yet perhaps no settled design , and was
the rest are merely names .   i think of it
that shed perfumes , and whispering thus address’d :
and is more useful than the man ,
and glimmered on his armour in the room .
in many foreign cities , far away ,
and high ,
yet strode they on , through the moon 's fantasies ,
some more of such a frame ,
her pouch of the centuries ' injuries compressed ;
she meets thee , sylvia , and with glances , bright
the city and its hall of him :
betwixt these rocky pillars gabriel sat ,
nor the foot of man , nor hoof of courser ;
and then got scared and run and kicked , and i 'd
good - bye to dreams ; for me a life of art !
since gold alone should not have been its price .
and behind me was the shouting and the shattering
sat in a corner ,
but all for nought ; for while therein they huddle from the bane ,
that i lent my hat to him ,
by the sycamore passed he , and through the white clover ,
legs of willow - twigs will make him ,
no more the tinted bark is lightly borne ,
roses on the creamy skin .
yes ! my bosom - friend,--alas my brother!--
she her old vices , in her inmost breast ,
all silently , the little moon
all in gray clouds closely muffled ,
for i 've told her that i do ;
a leaven'd cake in her devoted hands
no more those coursers with triumphant joy
grown to manhood ages since ,
otherwise , you see , he needed
" o full of pity she , who undertook
of cooling fountains : oft his horns entwin'd
joseph , the eldest , we have seen was true
when suddenly from out the woods appeared
good , resolve to banish sinful thoughts and loathsome evil .   let
this said . the smoky cloud was cleft and torn ,
to change the dome into a ring ,
walking where'er thou bid'st it , and the storm
_ and other old fairy stories _
vainly pleads !
but for her eyes -- they made
to your people and dominions ;
the sorrow of the bleakness of the long wet winter night .
" inglis , wha yokes wi ' you 's a gowk , atweel !
is heard not again ! "
when the proud and great stood by thee ,
the vulture ’s mangled body bled .
who ' scap'd not envy , when of truth he argued ,
away upon the sandy seas ,
it thus remains they must resemble , then ,
or the accession large of wealth
i started , and we paced the flags along
for the hope that none seeketh is coming to light .
came out , and smoked its cigarette
his death shall be his pride ! "
the flow'r amang our barons bold ,
flowed silver to the west ,
tempt not the reflow , from the ebb just saved !
none shall man refuse ,
once , when the skies were just as blue
he sclaundreth there in audience
know thou the secret of a spirit
but , joy ! from mr . eddy 's barn
till , out in the shade of a blackberry thicket ,
and reading mysteries with brightened eyes
swelling pity smoor'd his wrath ;
to daśaratha ’s court he sped
then sees , except he wins the martial maid
the branches of the stone pine sway
she asked but sun and rain to bless
whene'er they came in or whene'er they went out ;
uenit et extremo phoenix longaeuus ab euro
two fairer birds i yet did never see ;
he called her by name -- that is , griselda -- and asked her where
she bundled them into the shawl . her eyes were bright .
and we see that the departed
a man may hae an honest heart ,
i will think of thee yet ,
the kid comes home today !
at bottom of the bay runs a clear stream
  the descent and the attack of the eagle symbolize the
' t is the seal , despair , --
will lift his little girl , --
_ whose hands _ unfold the azure sky ,
knows what the wants of all those children are ;
full in his track of light , like ships with shadowy canvas
the wonder of our wealth ,
i knew they were my own--
so back he went and lovingly
kind hearts and true ,
this was the parting that they had
now cyllenian hermes called forth from the halls the souls
yet lost ere you transfuse your smell .
and swore by mary fre ,
by the shores of the beautiful sea .
and a handsome man was rowing .
and every soul , it passed me by ,
and so upon the next and following morn ;
to the wainola fields and meadows ,
which knitting their rancke braunches part to part ,
each gem illumined with a triple star .
therefore with manlier objects we must try
like clouds across the pale moon glancing ,
and there he sat till crow of cock ,
why she should go to our mother ,
mountain on mountain , as the titans erst ,
the shores by the waves of four oceans embraced ,
in wrangling be divided ,
through the vast sea of being , and each one
yonder from the market - chapel ,
olympian and national gods , apollo , jupiter tonans and feretrius ,
and folk begin to tak the gate ;
in a black oak chest all carven ,
here from the world i win release ,
under the guidance of a single pilot ,
_ gabriel . _                   through heaven and earth
and all the trees were harried by cold rain
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
it sit the wel to taken hiede
she turned away , lamenting very sore ,
' hark forward , forward , holla , ho ! '
lighting the hands and the hearts that cherish
are fairer than the rest ;
and dances with the daffodils .
that in the mighty mantle i was rob'd ,
the tropic dawn with all things dropping dew ,
foaming cider in the glasses high .
no counterpoint of cunning policy ,
the bitter ending of my faithful love .
from hence he sees where solyman descends ,
strike down the twilight dim ,
its tattered arms and tattered knees
but somehow left my subject line by line ,
so long they held such pastime / and with so mickle heat
and when thou seest a shooting star ,
in her eyes the love of cricket .
of black epirus ; and since this yourselves
i tremble to think of you , world , at all ;
what shall be said between us here
breezes of perfume;--
was scouted as a slave should be .
i but entreat thee now to follow me !
ere summer has unfolded it ; i looked
have sunset clouds looked down on thee
for a boy who loves bad tricks
they 'll jeer at me , and they 'll sneer at me ,
your majesty :
little mary alice smith -- how proud she was of
endless joy ,
our burdens are heavy , our natures weak ,
countenance wore the aspect of intelligence .
as if one thing were beating on the same
they carry with them thraldom ’s chain .
michael 's as much to me as my dear lad .
and to the rest exclaim'd : " we have no power
and charge , till blood floats fetlock - high ,
of fire , on high .
and his _ chums _ now see , by his _ foul matter _ ,
with waxen face , indents the baby cot ,
he begged the man to teach his knack .
was the day that he lost the fight .
because the man the bees had blest was bothered with the fly .
whoso of men had hearkened it ,
silence i crave !
and the achaeans gathered under the shady grove of apollo .
we shall hold in the air a communion divine ,
thy flight shall the clarion obey ;
about me leagues of houses lie ,
thy smile awakes the bird of dawn ,
" vainly thou bid'st me wake the strain ,
why should we sigh o'er a summer that 's dead--
that there exists a gold ,
teacher , omar khayyam , in a garden ; and one day he said to me ,
and rise to faults true critics dare not mend ,
love 's worshippers alone can know
and somewhere afar
there still remains , to mortify a wit ,
led on his troops against a mighty foe ;
round badge of the day . or else because , as said ,
two rivers to each other run
and the hurry of the pickers - up ; or when , on the roads , the
she was sweet as a rose
one there lives , who , lord of all ,
the writer is one of the very few present - day novelists who have
so is it now i am a man ;
triumphant over all the storms of death .
thus to take an early potion . "
woman .
a shape which , somehow , there may be . "
suddenly like a vast volcano split
ethnica te totam cum f[oe]davere fluenta ,
the faun 's catch , the nymph 's tremor , and the heart
and we trust as one who -- come woe or come weal ,
what proof hast thou of this ?
each to the loved one 's side .
we 've proved ourselves fit for the vote !
when rosmer saw his love was gone ,
but just to have a little play ,
and bound her tender arms in twisted wire :
and the cause of his woe , he would have you to know ,
periodicals:--_the english review , the saturday review , the
here firm i rest ; they must be best ,
sitting in the tree ;
and i 'll ride to london to answere your quarrel .
keep watch and ward upon his track
" no need thy will be told , which i untold
a lone star her face
and die for what they loved !
discipline ! my ! " eyes right ! " they cried ,
on papal bulls !
who counted their seasons when insects were winging ,
and to the leading soldier said--
that never feel a stupor , know no pause ,
and caste his werk ful wysly , or he wroughte .
now on the polar windes , then with quick fann
who , helping uncle jim , stirred up the fire ,
quinces all silvered - o'er with hoary down ,
howe'er you murmur , hagan , i 'll serve her truly still . "
to the heart of man replieth :
and the flying fairies ' looks ,
for deem not this small frith , called " the great sea , "
enough ' twould be
shall shine like the gold
angels from friendship gather half their joy ) ,
the _ leaves that cloathe the forest - trees _ ;
then she spoke the words which follow ,
he 'll comfort me when cares do grieve .
staring unseeing , while his mind repeated ,
does la felice lie down to rest .
in those who , when they may , accept not grace .
" so , god bless you both .
yet coming ages ne'er will hear them sounding ,
the sun returns . "   it was no palace - hall
why ' tis so sweet and wild--
of citizens in holiday attire ,
spring , with her golden suns and silver rain ,
mother of mercy , help me!--help your child ! "
art thou of every other death bereft ,
but i will ride to penny mill
personally acquainted with most of them , and i can assure you the
may be entitled , or more chaste and sage ;
let life 's day , as it closes ,
howe be it i knowe my wordes shall suche greue
through all the wide border his steed was the best ;
" now do n't ! " or " you must n't do so . "
reikjavik , who is at the same
and , watched by cockatoos and goats ,
to the sacred river 's whirlpool ,
god ! giver of breath and bread ;
the youth , who daily farther from the east
" i do n't believe she will as long as we did not burn any more , "
hou that the king his fader is ;
" o no , " she cried , " i thank you , no .
wine and spices mixed with malice,--
i have drunk my portion . in thy hands , old man . "
it's -- oh , for the rock and the woodland lane
the heav'nly steersman at the prow was seen ,
what will you have ? it costs but speaking .
and melancholy , silent maid ,
* x   179 . the blind man implores christ                      r. wi .
o happy he , who still renews
" come in to supper , dear , " i heard her call ;
you can see
a perfect reason in the central brain ,
were gathered hebrews not a few ,
but the lessening rumor ended
but banisht , i admire his fate ,
by the many hundred years red - rusted ,
i think on poets nurtured ' mong the throes ,
bess evans , now , or sister polly ,
cvrsv uolucri pendens , cum nouacula ,
and labored in her lands .
and veiled her delicate face .
thanks to the iniquity of this wheel of heaven which
alike the glowing breast of either swayed .
which gave the declaration , cried and laughed
why speak ye no word?"--said glenara the stern .
his joy at the meeting ; and both of them made
we have deer more sound and tame .
entire control of the thing . "
bring daphnis home , bring daphnis to my arms ,
of gesture , or least action , overawed
night , golden - panelled with her window panes ;
to seek the distant spot where she
sent the queen , that happy lady -- in a palanquin , by men
and , at ticino 's passage , bar his way .
i , who recoil from pain , must strike and wound .
congregate , a glorious show ,
to hear the distant voice of philomela
two veterans , son and father , dropt together ,
down into that darksome cavern
the cottage levelled with the ground ,
which rise and fall , as , to the margin pressed
happily i had a sight , ii . 140 .
teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver
shall know their treasure ; treasure , then , no more .
when mournfu ' as i sat on the stane at the door ,
to - day i miss you .   what to - morrow brings
the count rollanz has nobly fought and well ,
soiled with the battle 's stain , and worn
to mark your affluent condition ,
here goddes hadde in sondri wise ,
in shushan on the errand of my lord .
on the mountain - side ,
did not give an invitation
i staid , and saw two spirits in whose look
overwhelmed , but not borne on its surges along ;
to make of as i may ,
whose heads are where the gods are , and whose sides
of soul and sense its darkness spread
what canon says i may n't
how did the singers carol , the singers of my soul ,
the world is full of horrors , falsehoods , slights ;
the mirror now
inferno : canto xxxiv
wind - like the arapahoe sweeps the bison 's dusty
when the ranter came to anster fair ,
of daphne by orontes , and th ' inspir'd
misery , have chased from numbers,--
so instead of getting to heaven at last ,
yet make at once their circle round the sun ;
yet we 're eternally sterile still .
upon a very ancient dutch house , iii . 399 ;
" i beheld , too , in that vision
" yes , they are blemishes , i own , "
but , drawing , bent the barbs . he therefore loosed
the first , last purpose of the human soul ;
come back with night again .
except a stem , a chalice,--once a rose .
bids elegance and splendour rise ;
following him , i found
with all his spoils , on high uphung , adorn'd .
and on her head , full seemly for to see ,
upon this globe , now cold
for if weake nature only can
the white slave beside him , self - fettered and sold !
' tis hard to attune it ,
just a throb of pain ,
the whirling ways of stars that pass--
bone of my bone thou art , and from thy state
the battle , whose illustrious palm may be
or as amid the noonday night
for their work continueth ,
great men of old stand in marble erected ,
and his long beard descended on his breast .
we came , before you but a little space ,
upsprung , till soon the distant village peal
thou gav'st him life ! but was not this
i 'm the prophet of the utterly absurd ,
tempt daniel with gifts to read the writing and tell the import
and the slow river , quiet as a pool !
grazed my side the cab - wheels hit ,
safe , o hide his loved head :
of one particular professor .
credibility , something must be known of lesley .
porphyria 's lover
and put away my toys ,
after my death,--dear love , forget me quite ,
to mock alike thine art and indignation ,
" if i can attain heaven for a pice , why should you be envious ? "
and helmless to the forestward gan hie ,
who then will afford me a mint - water dram ,
( ll . 277 - 291 ) " why should i slave ? " quoth he . " i need not serve a
a double life with hers . and they two in a day
turkey , india , lo all ,
to queen kauśalyá by his side :
mine eyes upon thy wounds are bent ,
in one deciding battle overcome ,
all alone , we two ; he 's a clever man :
and out of the houses the rats came tumbling .
with the most holy love . it can not be
late troop - sergeant - major an ' -- runs with a letter !
for every creature 's want !
falls into your ear but to die ,
" lo , hovering near on dark and dampy wing .
her swelling voice resounds the lofty strain :
my honoured brother ’s younger bride :
with all the cunning of your mind ,
she who to heaven more heaven doth annex ,
the pastoral spirits first
out in the grey cheerless chill of the morning light ,
that all neglected places of the field
to sail over the floods with thee . feed freely the differ-
to the hands of osmo 's daughter . '
oh , backward - looking son of time !
our tears are like the rain
drink ! for you know not why you go , nor where .
one of them killed , the other dreadfully wounded . at a short
with love 's red wine , save for some drops of gall
liberty there is the light .
pursuing winds that censure us
and lilies dear are there .
and wilt thou know me , love , with bended back ,
swift as the sparkle of a glancing star
but an englishman 's throat is expanded so wide
" i 'm all right , pearson ; it is n't that . i was only wishing and
and my command obey :
look deeper still .   if thou canst feel
both heav'n and earth copartners in its toil ,
his weary watch thy child . o father , come !
then juno sent the busy sun , loth though he was , into the waters
dewed that repentant sinner 's cheek .
who has toiled for nought both late and early ,
though black his hair , as black could be .
to cheer the drooping spirits of the maid ,
o hie honour , sweit heuinlie flour degest ,
" i want to take you along with me ;
him hector reprimanding , stern began .
and suffer with my race . "
there , above noise and danger ,
aeaea , ' the dwelling - place of circe in homer , with the promontory
and saide , deare sister alisoun ,
scinditur , acclinant intonsa cacumina terrae
her neck like to a stately tower
warm milk from bowls , and holy blood we pour ,
at first he spoke no word ,
lit with a star - fire strange ,
forthwith the creature to his fellows drew ,
welcome the coming of the longed - for may .
he loosed its chain , he gain'd the adverse shore ,
' tis that in each recovery he preserves ,
of all the simple peasant - folk of france :
and many a maid has watched the dark banks over--
( 1839 - 96 ) studied theology , and after the death of his father , a
a genuine poem and forgotten to scold you .
but the scornful sun - god ,
a rich confusion form'd a disarray
he pauses not , and this and that one hears ;
then skipping wi ' lichtsome heart , i hie
thou art firm , if brittle too ;
and now , good , simple man ! he looks
full many a moon - like form has heaven 's weel
receive ere long the punishment .
and when my ill - school'd spirit is aflame
his sad sonnets all are made !
peeps out,--and if there comes a shower of rain ,
to think i can not read my reid ,
my warm stove is quick to get ablaze ;
beneath these poppies buried deep ,
they all at once rejoin'd , " so easily
thy spirits have a fainter flow ,
and on my brow the iron crown
she springs like a beam on the brow of the tide ,
in their sweet cottage , to return no more .
" while the blue rivulet
not that i do n't approve of all your charms ;
and the sun sank behind the shady reach,--
be protection to this hero ,
the haughty answer back , " i am , i am the king ! "
are broken at a blow
in order to their stations leap ,
as strange and as simple as childhood ,
he hearkens to a suppliant ’s prayers ,
he points his ardour , and exerts his might .
and plot to reconquer the wall ,
pulled for her waiting cauldron , on my ken
we love , and mischief 's other name is distance .
there was the royal car whereon
sudden a thought came like a full - blown rose ,
they 'd hang up nicely on a nail .
but bent by , etc .
rose swearing on the air , with protests crude .
for that whereof thou askest and entreatest me , be sure i
thus to rescue thee from trouble .
another present , and , on being asked where were their wives ,
yet still he ever gazed awest ,
de night was dark , lak ' one black cat ,
' not hard to tell , ' said cormac .
i wad gie them a ' to charlie .
clung to and licked the posts , and maddened with the blast .
of the great harvest - marshal , the year 's chief ,
peace that should claim respect from lawless might .
yield to successors , and away . "
oberon , oberon , rake away the gold ,
nor sated with this ruin , he demands
that every beauty
wide his trousers , and they fluttered
the sorrowful vast phantom moves illumined ,
effrenae solitus pectora coniugis
the false prepared decks below ,
( and faith , we have found it true ! )
nor kindred follies want a fool to greet .
dominion over palm and pine--
though some nice people like it . "
demure with porringer and plate
nor can for mental heaviness their high study pursue ,
in the sight
a - many years ago--
o boating on the rivers ,
with him carried siegfried / that same mantle then ,
into my numbered tomb .
it would be light , and i would see in thy dear eyes
be weie of kinde , as resoun wolde ,
cantoned throughout the winter months had lain ,
is far more easy to discern
naomi stands in the amber glow
with your white cravat at your withered throat ,
whether he 's free by law or no .
= longfellow 's courtship of miles standish.= edited by homer p.
putting reason back , to watch that fugitive play ?
without , among the cattle of the field .
well known in your midst , though , i may say , an
quips , and cranks , and wanton wiles ,
a good appointment in the docks ;
" great tithe and small are dead and gone ! "
( whenas she prods him with her prong )
bury him nobly -- next to the donkey ;
and great are the hardships to dree ;
each like to a bosomed moon .
at hom the grete unrihtwisnesse ,
knowing well when certain years are over
the lucky got their second horses .
but wait !   maybe gord , when thinkin '
well if he find in his soul at last
_ that strength _ is enough for me .
for him too delicate and dainty fare .
the sire heroic , hoary - gray ,
" my father , " answered telemachos , " thy sweet fame has resounded
" if i should return in future
` if that she vouche sauf for to do so . '
to see amongst the regulars his name !
there perfect is , and ripened , and complete ,
a score of maids of spotless lives
with all their gaffs , and very speedily
i guess it 's only when he sings
it was noontide ringing ,
your wemys , vaughans,--half - fledged sinners ,
certes in raging fire they both did frie .
peace , by its battles told ;
for thou art here .
it surely hurts like sin .
but thou hast long had place to prove
the woodbird 's asleep on the bough .
wherefore so soon decay ?
were her faint tones that thrilled upon my ear .
i always loved a bit of beef ,
tearing my nerves wi ' bitter pang ,
and built in it her refuge , whence lightly she hurl'd
fought hunger , fiend , and cold
earth he gathered from the hillocks ,
till he reached the quay , steel - fitted ,
in a land which knows not change
and feel we could not let this german culture
doreen she never looked my way ; but stood
of gallant men , were there ;
she can not light the city ;
oft come repenting tempests here to die ;
there in king gunther 's country ; so rich was none before .
around the breathed boar : again i 'll poll
among the illustrious scottish sons
for that i stole æneas from the fight
stout drummers shall beat ,
it may be the trail will lead me afar
know'st thou the land ?
the mind still trembled on the jarring chord ,
corflambo , iii .
till this heroic lesson thou hast learn'd ;
gem of the crimson - colour'd even ,
stephen.--sterne . by h. d. traill.--macaulay . by james cotter
eternal : from his voice i learn , whose word
pill the blossoms , hurrying to ' an ' fro,--innumerous are they ,
your pardon ! ' tis delightful to transport
ah , i could win him with authorities ,
to cybele , the mother of the gods ,
did airy phantoms fill my brain?--
the offence , that man should thus attain to know ?
' praise god and god 's mother , ' dathi said ,
the bathers lounge and throng ,
my life shall be so high and right
the delicate - ranka"d golden corn ,
repeat a childish prayer ;
he seems to open all his own
the fop replied : " all realms polite ,
fly , thou made bubble of my sighs and tears .
at once the silken tassel of my purse
under the stars above ;
to check the vessel 's course ,
that he by heaven is chosen to restore
the eternal , exhaustless freshness of each early morning ;
i knew love once and all its gloriousness ! "
by all the martyr'd virgins kist ,
marrowbones , cherrystones ,
for marrying to a base degree .
in faithful mirror the celestial justice ,
fourth family of the omnipotent sire ,
" the king hath done according to his word ,
thy songs are right epic , they tell how this rude
aim was true , and the spear severed all the muscles at the root
in who s eterne remembrance
then , if they fib , and if their stories tease you ,
but ever be your own sweet selves .
immortal thence forever by his side .
come bravely on , my masters ,
to reach some point of excellence in art .
yet spake again the wise men / who looked with keener gaze ,
we buried the cat ,
without , at least , ae honest man ,
of panic revellers , whose cries
" nay , not the king , but the king 's jester , thou
in kindred hearts abide .
would judge both pictures , or both true .
so many , and so many , and such glee ?
whether it is that she reflects so bright ,
lyke as when iove with fayre alemena lay ,
hungrig hier und hungrig dort ,
all that ideal beauty ever blessed
man to man , with death between .
of this broad earth in firm control .
forever , like a heart that knows no peace ,
" dam , for mey loffe , and ye well thys wer ,
that begins the kindness . but come , declare me this and
i see a fair young couple in a wood ,
from a mother old and gray .
from this lone breast and weary brow
when he walked out upon the street
she ca'd her in hale - claith ;
or upon the stairs he waited ,
pawn'd in a gin - shop , quenching holy drouth .
the earle of ewe in warre that had beene bred ,
but no sweet bird did follow ,
usher in the spring ;
i am glad to think i am not bound , 187 .
with eye propitious , and o'er all presides .
without delay . judge , monsieur , how more than sorry i am to be
and distant empires own his holy sway .
and when he 'd gin up all he had , he 'd drop a subtle wink ,
and dash the rain on the window - pane .
frae our cauld shore ,
as long as th ’ bold 42nd wur thear ,
in the dungeon as a malefactor and reserved for horrid tortures !
just then a deathful dream minerva sent ,
this mighty mass of earth , this solid globe ,
in justice you can not refuse
had for companions tearful eyes ,
nor dread the peck of butcher 's bill . "
by the not - as - yet - convinced . for me ,
another helen other wars create ,
thus spake he , and aroused the heart of wise aias . and he went up
' tis immortality deciphers man ,
impleat augustos barbara praeda sinus .
know to your lying heart ; now kindly go .
whirls by a kind of blessed spontaneity .
times of primeval innocence restor'd !
and smoked before their hospitable lord ,
when thou dost rank thee ' mongst the deities ,
lightly such drapery good rinaldo thins ,
so i ; then circe , bearing in her hand
and began to travel quickly ,
at the christmas show :
in service high , and anthems clear ,
is the meaning all revealed
at shrines that ne'er knew offering ,
expanding on the ground , thence filled with earth
and fold on fold roll down the snows .
the crowd , with hands uplifted , to the gods ,
to the cool breath of reason , told my love .
spoke the lively lemminkainen ,
rose - water , and strewed with bloom
and work for it till i die .
the lightning zigzags shoot across the sky ,
because the charity of my native place
let roars of elephants be loud .
and still unconquered , though o'erset , appears .
another corsair , worse than barbarossa ,
where the actors step forth on a blood - red soil ;
slumber , dreamless of wrong;--
who loves to watch the sunlight
ere this , you know . ' tis my ancestral right
be with the worke of losels wit defamed ,
what mailed endeavor with resistless years;--
but beneath it through the clusters
hinted in a good - humour'd way ,
bit of a nipper just learnt to speak--
what would he trade for liberty ?
leading her mystic mime ,
all nature seems his vassal proud to be ,
respectable for his genius and his learning . '
stoopt , took , brake seal , and read it ; this was all :
but sylvio soon had me beguiled :
concerning loot and plunder , malversation ,
always our old feuillage !
the poet who thinks life a paean ,
a blessing to secure ;
fairies with sparkling crowns and dewy hands ,
his gloomy bosome 's darkest character
the robe pretence was wearing .
" then conduct the bridegroom 's courser
bathed in the freshness of the ocean stream ,
as i stand apart to judge the better
that harsh voice of unhappiness .
over the lofty mountains !
captain , work the reckoning ;
till molds the hero form ? thou knowest best !
the ferns and the fondling grass said ` stay , '
within a month , i got ad oppenendum ;
the hero ráma fondly laced
an herald called , and said , " go tell those news
command his removal . the seat of calypso described . she consents
so lately at that mind 's command ,
the names of country , heaven , are changed away
to keep sky - tinted eggs inviolate .
ere yet it served beleaguered syracuse:--
nor all that glisters , gold .
as by aganippe 's clear fountain
thus , through the parting clouds , the son of may
whence first was the seed outpour'd .
“ the power of fortune is my lot uprais'd :
now he is old , he has reigned too long .
that beast and man was brother .
i envy every poet 's rhyme
they carry their swags out back .
he will not manage her , although he mount her ;
and simple truth miscall'd simplicity ,
with star - hieroglyphs , leave thee unharassed
between the morning 's watchet wings ,
what was so fugitive !
wordes ar but wynde , and though it oft so fall
of leaves and trembled blossoms , where there ran
single combat fighting in full armour , your bow and your arrows
but meantime , the mother in calmest content ,
go hence , sir launcelot , saith the queen ,
and dipped its cup in the purpurate shine
this done , with a dignified mien
than beauty brought to unworthy wretchedness
ajax with it ; so he drank salt water and was drowned .
return unto their wanton sin again .
yet was so grateful always
the courtier 's gems may witness love--
their pleasant indian town
" davideis " can be missed , it is for the learning that had been
and leap'd across the infant stream .
gar saddle sune , and make him ready :
he will leap from lip to lip ,
and you shall know that guest
thus his fierce heart which death had scorned oft ,
one man could die for liberty ! but we , burnt out and cold ,
protinus exsculpunt sacrato in marmore formam
prince , found his way to bolingbroke , a man whose pride and
and downward from the top of the hard bank
contadle la mi fortuna
enlightening and encompassing his worlds .
and all the stones be fallen on you ! "
meantime his golden face around
out of their darkness and despair ,
unbarred to ships of many lands .
wicked witches in thy chambers ,
the rayes of bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;{61 }
my master and the neighbors all
around a deep , soft porch of pearl .
that man inflicts on all inferior kinds ,
to live is happiness ; but to die is pain .
returning home one evening , at the place
while them the trojans spoil'd , meantime the greeks ,
ere he cross'd the raging sea ,
that ye may good doctrine hear ;
in flinders flee :
and with them all my head 's adorning .
no waiting a to - morrow car ,
once , as a friend : this fixed a day in spring
lord gregory tore his gowden locks
perched , silently , upon the voiceless strings ,
a more than human wisdom guides the helm ,
over the barren deep . i send him not ;
ah little cloud that in love 's shadow lief
only said to her , " nokomis ,
that dove that did not touch the land ,
thy walls , o tagliacozzo , without arms
then all the everlasting gods to heaven
crumpled grey - white papers
the pipe of the faun comes on their track
and conscious of their fault , and penitent ;
" my poor , poor boy ! " said the schoolmaster again , laying his hand
o moon do not keep her from me any longer .
and sable stole of cypress lawn
into his place , and the great son returned
inshtead of paying gelt you 'd kit for me a yankee vife ! "
and my fair sister kriemhild , who reigns in hungary ? "
and feels as light as it had wings ;
the faint fresh flame of the young year flushes
are not a finger scratched . o monstrous hate
from west to south outstretched long doth lie ,
with bent points falling baffled from the shields
so much more grateful , as it more presents
but , lo , because her bearing years must end ,
serpent - winding ,
wave once more beneath the sunlight .
cowper , w. , his letters commended , 427 .
the gods assembled ; they , at once , their seats
it is an easier matter for us contemplative creatures ,
peace hath her victories as well as war
they 'll let the golden slip - rails down
kin , friends , and those to one another known ,
anon his beating heart , alarum striking ,
to be first - called out of the earth and fail
stare , linnet , and cock sparrow !
and ther he fesomnyd in~ hys hond
terrific was the sound that filled
prompt to atonement for the evil wrought ,
here at my feet what wonders pass ,
and swear by heaven 's truth is there fire or no ;
but he can not wait for his honor , now the trumpet has been blown .
of these 64 poems , 12 are now published for the first
whole crowds . achilles in his chariot stood ,
and wander wild again o'er field and fell ;
to weave the dance that measures the years ;
there has been reward -- but the end of all
and move and sing along creation 's way .
as he againe so falling , likewise feeles
for me your peace !   my health is high .
for false , foul prose - men this fair truth in verse .
he stayed about the steading
know not their own secret .
that i shall love alway ,
when all the silent host of the blue sky
mighty thy name when rome 's lean eagles flew
and frankincense,--
in the swamp he found a land - ridge ,
and comb the wavings of his pendent ear .
we shall never see his face ,
like to that arbour plant another bower ,
one only knows .   yet if the fret
ca ' the yowes to the knowes ,
she turned her head and the name she said
that follows the fall of the year .
no more for me unless you say more .
" the sea is his ; he made it ; and his word
in helpless wise from out their hands were casting darts aloof .
oh , of all sentences ,
" and i eat that cook in a week or less ,
appear'd like two poor harmless women , who
thanne shal erthe of the erthe haue a rewfull{e } stinke .
the sound of a whip comes faint and far ,
the wine he loved , the men with whom he laughed
he said , and with a spear - thrust through his breast
to what strange nations shalt not thou resort ,
and among the jarls and thanes
and hard enough into the feathery west
her cheeks are paler than the moon
now here , now there , her brother shows all flushed with victory ,
sometimes i read what warriors wrote , sometimes a king 's command ,
now , sacred sisters , open all your spring !
of riot and ill - managed merriment ,
" i carried them up , " he said , " by a ladder there ;
implacable sweetness ; the thousand little gold and blue and
laborious ! ' tis impracticable quite ;
just there it is our ways were parted--
balls of ice and orbs of fire ,
saints have adored the lofty soul of you .
shoots of hop enough she added ,
but though them fits was bad enough , the wust is nowadays ,
now come ; and unto thee i will unfold ,
keep silence ... ask no more .
head bowed down , and deeply grieving :
your talk'--an ' ' ere i seen ' er eyelids flick--
when the kye comes hame .
for the boat of väinämöinen ,
there are mincing women , mewing ,
he took a frayed hat from his head ,
and one , who understood the tuscan speech ,
while lufra , crouching by her side ,
when for his guidance he had got him roome .
which through the sea a wind propitious sends .
that kissed the maiden all forlorn ,
king ryons of north wales , and slay
assign'd me .   there , whence at thy lady 's hest
how cato from his toga plucked the carthaginian fruit ;
there , you are wrong .
obtain credit from the young and unexperienced , as misleading
wainamoinen , ancient minstrel ,
as sea - water , having killed over - heat
by thomas mathison , originally a writer in edinburgh , and
i loves you , dear vinie ; an ' you know i cain't he'p it .
with the bead - decked whip he lashed him .
because things have n't gone his way .
without either sign or sound of their shock
feed on it ; sweet and bitter it shall be ,
true happiness beamed on each face ,
the moon is mother and the sun is sire
the solemn woods with sounds were rife
full freighted on a faerie sea ;
and all i 'm worth i now would stake
the city of palms , and yet the walls thou seest
or rather what much more she seemed to be ,
blown seaward through the shadow , flies and drifts
and as he lay , the sleeper dreamed a dream .
but with unwearied fingers yet ,
from afar and near flocked hither ;
shalt out of both one new one make ;
but cloaked in clouds blood - raining : on she stalked
like women 's hands ; the embracing boughs express
say once again thy sweet " i will ! "
each nobly contending a suitable prize ,
now lawde and pryce o venus lady dere
copernicus once , in a drunken fit , found
and a tall scar - face ball player ,
thou govern'st everything , but answer'st unto nought .
that what 's moste diabolicall , seemes deuine .
now you have come , how can i care for kisses
as the most bitter love , like god 's own grace ,
and he spoke not — no ! his lips were silent ;
brings it down in twirling crimson showers , where lie
or like the sun - flooded silks
' twas meant that man should doubt all mystery .
here , while the courtier glitters in brocade ,
he flies , that orphan boy , astyanax ,
i can only reply
and i 'm a better man than you !
he tore from the grey the saddle away ,
was done to make it plain ;
to ask thee of other truth , that yet
and the rich pictures with their dark old tints
there was not one that shed not tears for rue .
i 'm sorry for my words , came from my tongue ,
surgeons as ' appendix - snatchers '
nulliusque larem , nullos adit illa penatis .
but lately a ' was clad wi ' snaw ,
my lord !
some pearl - lipped shell still dewy with sea foam
men pitied her , for she was pretty .
are wise or fool .
with him he takes the best among his men ;
the breath of morn and man , where foot by foot
and make hills blossom like the vales ;
on this great sinner , who did break
towards the weirs with a musical swirl ;
and purging , too , was also tried .
" return ! ( said hector , fired with stern disdain )
lulling the year , with all its cares , to rest !
each open passage , and each privy way
to feast with us the nobles of the land ?
though every sorrow which may shake
craig , for example ; or mr thomas smibert ; or mr adam
peace is gone as i wake
turns and points to the north , so children 's obstinate insight
_ yealings _ , born in the same year , coevals .
you hear me ?   it is everard .   all day
has such a heart been shaped as abhors all wrong and injustice ;
it hails , it rains
his spirit breaks , but never bends .
pulled thereat with all his efforts ,
his supping sheep , and lengthening shadow spies ;
why do they not scream out
or more complete to overwhelm surmise ?
" ah ! why wilt thou affright a feeble soul ?
doth not weary ? where 's the face
perchance his wound is deep ; she listens long ;
temp'ring the mixture with her heav'nly hands ,
in contest to the fountain . / when that the same be done ,
too lifted up in heart because of it )
a part of canada 's sure destiny !
" you 're wounded ! " " nay , " the soldier 's pride
and sweare to pay , the battaile being past .
to the gods to make the choice for us . all we can safely
the romish faith she would restore .
love makes us _ willing _ , each to do
beside my desk and talk to me .
no friend to bathe our wounds , or tears to shed
in some facts traced to her , something more than the grace
each , with o’erwhelming terror wild ,
and pour thee through the people 's heart ,
" this is the end , " he muttered , " come at last !
yet not without sore loss the trojans fought ;
to see , in jest , if from a heart , that loves me dear ,
" he was my lover once -- my own , my own ;
and all their other evolution terms ,
gae mind your seam , ye prick - the - louse ,
get your red business done , i shall require
to hell , from whence thou came , i render thee . "
the following description by aubrey ( lives , & c. , ii . 332 ) ,
that pyre , those flames and altars ? this the end ?
dear old road , wheel - worn and broken ,
the fat ; breathe thou , and there 's the rich perfume .
the long and varied stretch from puget sound to colorado south ,
still thou art overwrought .   i would have asked
you laugh , half beau , half sloven if i stand ,
' deem'st thou i tremble for my life ?
dass ich mir selbst gefallen mag ,
" it is well known that corn - planting and corn - gathering , at least
love with the mystery and the melody .
of the
of envies , jealousies , and spite .
were spread , ' twixt which the tail inserted curl'd
and chased us south along . "
as never mortal would believe .
they climbed to their bench and went to bed ,
halitherses , who were friends of his house from of old ,
' pity , ' she cries ; ' some favour , some remorse ! '
laughed -- till the wang - teeth of each jaw appeared ,
and nothing in the world to do ,
these then he hung her senseless neck around ,
saying defild maide , doost wonder at this thing ?
and played him club for club ;
where you are , and all things shall come to you in time . "
in chirping bill the little songster brings
they made in the heart of october
the waters laid thee at his doore ,
thy people fathom life and find it dire ,
the buyers in their noisy way ,
beauty is beautiful but in thy glance :
but lone and still
over the brink of it ,
may not hear ,
i fain would sing : but ah ! i strive in vain .
burnt spices flash , and burnt wine hisses ,
sing , o'er the city dust and slime ;
feathered choir , whenever we take a forest walk with him . the
where all his potentates in council sate .
en i shake so i cain't speak
as though she were that passionate heloise
jetzt ist der garten unversehns erwacht ,
he traced with dying hand " remorse ! "
' so you can think it 's six feet deep outside ,
with the red mars between .
beyond the village , refugees
never fear though it break your heart--
so mourn'd achilles , his companion 's bones
for i have closed you in my inmost heart ,
echo , tell me , while i wander
laughs , from those deep divine
( butter and eggs and a pound of cheese )
and the enchanted change ;
autumn evening , and the morn
where he transported them with tapers quenched .
our bodies feel , where'er they be ,
the morn has come , and where are they ?
hanging neglected and unfastened down .
garten my goste al greffe for - ȝete
and not disfigured visibly . his face?--
the woods with that emulous gush
courage in your own " --
opens on katrine 's lake and isle.--
at last , it pleased the lord to let me see
before the wide - winged word takes flight
that vexed sore the swedish knights ,
` now , eem , ' quod she , ` what wolde ye devyse ?
than i with this delightful task .   her joy
the emu with his feathers queer
deceivers .
no one knows
say the bells of st . marg'ret 's .
he hung it on de wall .
he 's a friend to the farmer and friend to the crown .
the benediction shall be said
the reverse to be their toast ;
presses the huddled throng into the snares
' o sire , ' she said , ' he lives :   he is not dead :
the monster 's den exploring ;
clotho apportions to each wight that breathes ,
doth fiddle for the hun - men , / when near the door they go ?
here where they pass between their teas and teas .
on a christmas day we were mushing our way over the dawson trail .
' and oceans from their mighty mounds recoil .
thou art but as a word of his speech ,
and drink a balm to banish pain !
  warburton 's pope , vol . iv . p. 26 .
then the bee that hummeth lowest shall transcend you :
but ' tis by pow'r of art , and such a way
that mats the shore by which we pass .
the milky sky , the hazy , slender trees ,
boats when ' t was water , skating when ' t was ice ,
nor any had suspicion of the twain :
say , whence art thou come -- who art thou ?
to my rapt sight the arctic beams reveal .
som'ers , _ somewhere _ .
he being paid to satirize or flatter ,
she 's queen , she 's queen of all the world
too well instructed by my flame !
for sense and smergh ;
all night , beside her slumbering lord , the queen
they threw them on his mangled form .
as burning follows flame .
lemminkainen , full of courage ,
nor to the eastern ind dost rove
and al this thing to pandarus he tolde .
the clouds that drift , are slowly drawn
and with stern brow , belying the wrung heart ,
each the costly salad throws ,
students , to you ' tis giv'n to scan the heights
and the dripping wall is high ,
why should we ? water for my burning brain ?
is more soft than summer skies ,
if you glimes dem knee py knee ;
'' t was all i had , ' she stricken gasped ;
flung , perhaps , upon th ' floor ,
and who is parson palmer ?   i do n't know him .
tiny tree - tops , rose or thyme ,
'bout a dozen times whilse they
take note of thy departure ?   all that breathe
to daily toil must vigilance compel ,
fast was lickin ' up the dew ,
swell the vast song till it mounts to the sky !
and all the cabinet regularly hear
" surely the most beneficent and innocent of all books
der sohn beanstan ’s hatte geleistet sein erbot dir allerdinge ! ’
‘ syr , i wyll avowe that i have done ,
' hand , hammer , and spear , as our fathers did before us . '
no : when he moves his arm , it is to aid
look forth , o goldilocks my love ,
even so he had watched and wondered
your head on some warm pillow far away--
born for nought else but to attempt a rhyme
in brighter flowers and larger moons .
i never think of my land but a light is in my eyes ;
flashing in a gusty train ,
i told my love with artless blushes
o earth , o mother .
had raymond berenger , and this for him
rarely be found : so shall the world goe on ,
and geven hym there to dyne .
through sweeping wood that swept the waves
the white seed of the fruitful helpful morn ,
i hail the time of flowers ,
if e’er obsequious to thy juno ’s will ,
clean the peasant 's hut he keeps ,
' twas the village clergyman ,
from haidee 's glance than any graven letter .
one that his progress was quite slow ,
the subject of thy pleasure .
may be she slumbered with her lamb ,
are merciful and just .
now , ai me !   ai me !   last night
his image . thou dost mark them flushed with hope ,
keep me no longer in this pain !
so let me sing of names remembered ,
one common cavern in her bosom hides .
whiche wyll correct that thynge whiche god hath done
encouragement to sport or play ;
it 's mean to sit and fumble the cards
if thou canst plan a noble deed
and the sea - birds flutter around ,
where names of most renown in literature are found ,
" true love gives true love of the best :
this the time to sing of ahti ,
it is impossible to remember how many times our baggage had to be
and buried him beneath it . his broad breast
" it is yet is not , " wav'ring in belief ;
there was no wight save god and he that wist
and still the fight continues , still the sparks
schinus                                _ religions enthusiasm . _
thy foes are calm and strong and wise ,
brotando riega involuntario el llanto .
accustomed only to listen and obey the commands of others .
subjecit pedibus , strepitumque acherontis avari . _
the house of peers , throughout the war ,
when the woodland air is warm .
impediments , however , we should be able to identify at least
to mirth 's enlivening strain ;
but he , the mystic will of heaven unknown ,
but wild as bracklinn 's thundering wave ;
though tyro nor mycene match her name ,
to clarissa : a handsome shop - keeper .
there was a fine new place for me
then i thy soverayne prayses loud wil sing ,
the hermit piero , touch'd with charity ,
and their own loss , but never give relief ;
the whole day , and that night made answer none ,
my ignorance by his examples true
we shall awake and find it day .
who comes to bring us fire , hath said that zeus
o eve , in evil hour thou didst give ear
when severn shall reëcho with affright
to this strange spot , rakes , macaronies , cits
and i will make you merry . '
why only look , you scarce can see the end .
i have been very ill since last we met ,
and peacefully snored at night .
and cowe her measure shorter
postquam , exempta fames grubbo mappaque remota .
heart of the world give heed ,
while you , where silent surges fleet
they left the sick in their distress ,
adventure - loving boys should not miss this great story .
sweet smile ! the daughter of the queene of love ,
for i will die ;
but do n't you interfere at all ;
else should i merit everlasting shame ,
said an old wife mourning her only son ,
ne let the woods us answere , nor our eccho ring .
each flower a fiery jet-- ...
-- returning -- us , the remnant of your train ,
all mirth and revel . many a spear
prime parent he : and next him thou !
then along that river , a thousand miles
and god ordains no glory for a curse .
that in the council chamber on that day
the purple , glancing down a little , left
to share the holy rest that waits a life well spent .
through which the belt he drew ,
at first to bloom a lily on the m ,
and ire , at last to laughter won ,
wrinkl'd the face of deluge , as decai'd ;
the rosy morning greets me ,
yours very truly ,
who sate in counsel those great lords among :
your hat blows off , you chase it , bump a woman ,
ye wolves , and pards , and mountain bores adieu ,
a secret torment , and in terror drove
moaned .
the chastisement drawn down on us merited :   are we of worth
slipping away -- slipping away !
sweet heavenly juice , and therewith nourished
' twas to dream of la travers .   he thought she became
the herald turned when he had ended scant ,
of lording lovers , though her unstained soul
flings them far down , and sets thine eyes above ;
the fame and glory -- glory , the reward
as bulls the herds , and fields the yellow corn ;
too late , alas ! i must confess ,
and misconceits raised horrid shows ,
the saddest consequences !
now go not among the tombs , old man !
me sob all night for your implacable sake ?
a woful sight beheld ; the greeks in flight ,
this morning in my eyes .   i do not know .
o welcom hour whenever ! why delayes
with his songs of tender joy ;
elsie ! what ails thee , my poor child ?
a motley procession with many a fleck of foam and many fragments ,
when thus again their leader sage begun ,
for the pain of their people . their practice this ,
the cheerful lab'rer hastens to the field ;
could mock the mischief of a man 's despair
hence ignorance of ev'ry size ,
here a wimple , there a gleam--
that you find so dull in me .
hath in her suffering won ?
the bloody tocsin 's maddening sound ,
reclaimed from chaos , and with the embryo elements of matter--
and exclaim , " what remarkable sights ! "
and shameful in my sight were other way .
were checkt -- like fount - drops , frozen as they start--
the fingers of the deep hours slowly drew
concluded , and we sought the gardens :   there
overlook the great morn
there were men with hoary hair amidst that pilgrim band ;
which mihte unto that bladd acorde ;
and purple .   but the year is growing old :
and no - one will understand .
" peace " ere we kneel , and when we cease
" ilmarinen , worthy blacksmith ,
my heart began once more to thrill ;
the bravest of the host ,
to the waters and the wild
assemble straight a mighty force ,
not far from where we stood , her offering brought .
presence a thousand hale and light - hearted friends from among the
threatened the immortals , raising the din of tumultuous war on
then your aid is further needed ;
within my soul , nor speak to her aloud .
our treasured hope away :
octauo cecidit tideus , spes , vita pelasgia ;
observing a hostile fleet approaching his shores ; the other a
por infieles los acusa
the thought of six - and - eightpence
with all our vast machinery and weird powers
if thou wishest that thou shouldst see me on the resurrection - day
save to seek their repose
thy sorrow and thy calmness are thine own :
an ' thinks noa more of foaks than hens ,
and i 'd lost me ' at and rifle -- but i told you that before ,
wake with his rising beam the vocal shade :
and on his cheeks salt tears for ruth down slide .
the trees on the hills ,
then our priv'leges tryin ' to proon ? " sez he .
thank god !   he 's over and breathing still .
then i see the old loved faces
seize thee on thy nest , my robin ,
thou that mak'st gain thy end , and wisely well ,
yet hard to tame
he mentions some musical instruments :
the good , which sets a bound to our aspirings ,
menelaus . telemachus recognises the goddess , and the first
i was less dear to him , and valued less .
above the dark - lashed eyes .
charg'd with no less amazement : whence my view
high on a cliff against the sky ' twas placed ;
derrick and loom and bale ,
so to the stick she pleaded:--
my darling 's just a little girl almost--
till a hammer came up -- and drove it home ,
smoke arising high in ether ,
boast of " single blessedness "
_ ta messe basse au point du jour . _
to spend their happy days ,
they are experts at the races and at sundry other games--
alas ! on that night when the horses i drove from the field ,
he gave his friends the parting word ,
with scream of shot , and burst of shell ,
and we , who deemed him wise ,
such prayer achilles offer'd , and his suit
a bard like this , sweet as the gods in song .
in the full blaze of bonnets , and ribands , and airs--
he comes from gentle , radiant countries , with
which deep passion engenders ; that anguish which hangs
get , issue , offspring , breed .
and soon , full soon ,
i 'd swoon in songs which should'st illume the dark
aeuro ~ say what thou wolt , i schal it never telle
he likes a boggy acre ,
that for non occupacioun
where all things merge .
from ithaca , by the umbrageous woods
and this the coroner found unopened , cut
and are so eager that their princes can not hold them back . "
and led him up , thro ' stirling town ;
and that it seemeth better in thy sight
our second fruit , maddened us with pure joy !
he pilfers from every port of the wind ,
he can not guess if ' twere a magic sprite ,
quod si parrhasia sones in aula ,
in vistas bright ;
with nature 's blameless looks at strife ,
' tis christmas weather , and a country house
til i haue leyzer vnto her hye renoun
to that brimful heart of thine .
that scalds me now , that scalds me now .
" eludes great man 's sagacity
bending she twines her snowy arms ,
killing us off by the hundred a day ;
is swathed in a light , white raiment .
it sings ( o sweet and low )
toward the right hand his glorie , on the son
or else , if gaze they must ,
and this is the sole mortal who could grapple ,
green paddocks have but little charms
and the birds are gay in the blue o'erhead ;
and sent his looks before him up the hill ,
the lamb reached the end of his tether
then more i meled & sayde apert ,
if on our daily course our mind
allude to his antagonism to vatinius , which went on actively
and a - top of his wig was his hat .
circling the round earth with a solemn ray ,
no living creature of the triple world such pain may know !
our tongues most gladly sing thy praise ,
" oh , our manhood 's prime vigor ! no spirit feels waste ,
the damsel , from a short repose ,
and there , if one loves the romantic , one sees
the sad , sweet voice of some wood - spirit who
quia amore langueo .
power of expression by action , rhythm , diction
hurtful perchance , or soon destroyed ,
and still her fate reviled ;
let a fellow sing o ' the little things he cares about ,
behold this day , all storm at morn ,
for foolishness knoweth no future .
till art is but a formal figure , bringing
' whew ! ' said puck . ' waters you call 'em ! '
he so merrily and madly
by her it easily may be perceiv'd ,
ihr schmales bettchen teilte sie mit mir ,
" you must choose between me and your cigar . "
of your republic .   but i must have erred .
intercourse of mankind is the parent of each . according to the
if plums grew on a thistle ;
" we want a marriage dance . "
and fortune seek and find ! "
of meadow - larks in the meadow ,
and rail by its own power against it .
trust me the world , the firmament ,
portrayed with many a holy deed
one bright memory ; when i am sad
changed into heavenly toys .
when a new planet swims into his ken ;
where they stood looking off at the same place ,
stretch’d on the shore , and thus neglected dies .
but sweeter than the lids of juno 's eyes ,
on every goddess of the deep ,
a sylvan huntress at my side
needs must i lose them , needs with heavy heart
before i understood this place
holding him blind who saw as few have seen .
a moment from that rabble rout :
the cunning artist would have wrought her fair ;
why , socrates or plato -- where 's the odds?--
he is sleeping like a child beneath the stars .
then arises wainamoinen ,
--but , see , the evening star comes forth !
caught in the stubble of the world
the day and night , above the dusky town :
to talk in the kitchen .
who have loved thee , and lived with thee gayly and long ,
oh what a pure and sacred thing
when all the children sleep
mountains of ice , that stop the imagined way
to tell her that i love her .
thrice i have compass'd priam 's spacious walls
while all collected at the sight ,
some day i 'll break the halter - rope
true to the clamours of the blinded crowd ,
from my study i see in the lamplight ,
john thought . and he thought that if she could stand that without
_ hans lorbass _ . and still it grips me cruelly hard .
to them his smoke is sightless , black ,
and sat himself on , and rode .
to be , i hope , where souls are quieter .
smiling while it more luminous became :
than light may tread , too wearisome for song
who this moment wert so nigh ?
without the torment of the night 's untruth .
he , piecemeal torn by maddened steeds , yet came aback to live
i know that all my friends are nigh
a band of women comes from a height
a nobler death thou shouldst bestow !
and she said , " is it meet that i kneel ,
he 's awfully excitable ,
wonder not , though i am blind ,
there i sit with raised eyebrows :
the heaven is black with clouds and coming rain ;
that keeps his wisdom constantly .
none then was idle standing among the nobles there ;
which , unflinching and keen ,
would you know the rea - son why ?
to see that lamp of joy .
your lingering image dims my eye
qualis virgineos adhuc
who cries , " my father 's damned , and all 's my own . "
is a soft compound , grateful to the nose
well -- well ; the sad minutes are moving ,
dear , like a word from you . . .
and fall away to nothing there .
canst thou desire this wild retreat ,
examined swarm with errors , especially in the notes . pickering 's
older and dearer than these bright , new days :
that between these rocks and billows
a singing sweeter than the linnet 's note .
“ thus chang'd , a tail is added ; shrunk in size ,
of that which is no more , or painting 's woe
( there 's a bloomin ' bit o ' goggle in his eye )
to hear the old bible my grandfather read .
and twice a day he smoked his pipe ,
then purple sins bloom in the light
to which the duke replied , with steady phiz,--
and meet me in the battle fray ,
but even him the gods afflict , a son
he any without in the deep court - yard , whether through some
had lain mess'd up for their four gates and bridge .
at half - a - crown .
the desert vibrant grow .
they sweep from ida down to hellespont .
pure monism , inevitable if its logical implications are pressed
gall'd by the spur , but stranger to the course
and thrust me into horror , back from hope !
and all the meades adornd with dainty gemmes ,
troubled the lands and seas ,
in her each sentiment sublime is joined
if your sire was a cook , you must be a cook too :
discern'd , accruing to this upper world
and stepped through the casement to her
so from before mine eyes did beatrice
satur fu , fere mars : limen sali , sta berber
" food for us all , and clothes , and roofs come first .
" i'se jes come down from chapel hill
what prince 's wanton'st pride e'er could
( and for such doing they require not eyes ) ;
and oft in feeble tone essay'd to talk ;
the good ship lies , by little waves caressed ,
suits not the visage , open'd wide his lips
as she listened to the cuckoo :
and on the top of all , that passers by
did then thy little girl such joy confer
through stirling streets to lead his train .
although some knowledge doubtful , dark , obscure
all things are memory now with you ,
bonzer,--the best .
and that ther is no bare sticke ,
the trouble uncouth
more lonely , and , unless i see his face ,
still , still the streets , between their carcanets
men may scoff , and men may pray ,
majestic champion of hesperia 's name ,
with him that was so necgligent ,
and to the bridal train sends out
now her thoughts kept turning backward
to presume thervppon , it is but a vanyte ,
those hairs the tartar 's cruel hand shall rend .
e'en where the poorest workers are ,
better were it to go fasting ,
where on a grassy forest height i stood ;
oh , thou canst never gaze thy fill !
drove poor mamma fittig frantic,--
murreum nodo cohibere crinem ;
for sure the dear creature is almost divine ;
behold the hall where chiefs were late convened![4.b . ]
why , if they live still , let them come and take
where willie o kinmont he did lie .
and a walk in the fields at morning ,
an ' milk my kyloe kye .
sat him at the castle window ,
from agonizing fear and grief ;
with my mate to coo and bill
i do not know thee,--nor what deeds are thine :
scarce were the thirty days of mourning sped ,
love the shadow of the forest ,
thy prattling current 's merry call ;
vowing no wastrel of the line
rise glimmering to the blue verge of the night ,
and , as the bright dimensions of the star
and ah , i shall ne'er , lived i ever so long , see
so welcome when the bigot 's hell - torch flares ;
the happy children ankle - deep
and ah ! let it never
that shal bityden of necessitee .
farewell , fair day .   if any god
the cross was of bones o'er the altar .
all this for northern greed ,
such is th ' injustice of his daily theme ,
among themselves comfort and pride they shew ;
here we lie cosily , close to each other :
  from the following letter there is reason to apprehend that dr .
he cheerfully did tak his way ,
what ailed so smart a little maid
bound with her myrtles , beaten with her rods ,
vegetarian , non -- resistant , free - thinker , in ethics a christian ;
whilst he was thus discoursing , the number of men and of women
her life 's sad depths to rippling melody ,
oh , what 's the way to arcady ,
the wretched , for a little while mocks the weary traveller with
it 's your " good taste " that prefers
what i seek , and what i will !
she said : " but thou hast valour , dear , too much
are echoed by the fair !
speaks these words of disapproval :
with his soul gives strength to hers ,
that calls the past to our exact review ,
syllable , saving two , called antepenultima ; and little more , hath
greek drama suggested the ethical aspect of this strife , a
could i see it from the mountains
while she sits in her low - backed car ,
my fiefs , both lands and castles ; let none with me remain .
it seems to bring diviner memories
along the pave adonis trips ;
placed him in a boat of copper ,
the whole day long , and all days of the year .
then did i even as they do who are going
he chopped up kindling , shut up his shed ,
some softening gleam of love and prayer
for ever now in death 's obscurity .
of some rich potentate his vans he spread
from time to time my heart finds itself much straitened
only one ancient priest offers the sacrifice ,
the tempests black , that hourly rave ,
and in the midst it grew
made his home in awful grandeur on the cliff 's mysterious height .
sugríva ’s court with us thou seek ,
but the stateliest flower is all for me--
illuminated brains and warm hearts . no , i never will finish if i
look with me ( still those words in our ears ! ) once again
he heard the crowing of the cock ,
and this we know : death is not life effete ,
were i a king , thou shou'dst be mine ,
all movement of my life impedes ?
as do those guardian sprites of air
where birds with sea - blue plumage gay
there to extol our father 's name ,
( why should the key - hole rust ? )
scorning a new , wry'd casement
who would spill blood ? '
and make a perfect toilet :   for our caller
i sat with love upon a woodside well ,
and jealousy for all the past .
of age to help us . '
and the tired world breathe free through a long
at last we find ourselves defeated .
subiendo libre al inmortal seguro !
that give her heart relief ;
i that have wasted here health , wealth , and time ,
fus ' bellerin ' like a pawin ' bull , den squealin ' like a sow ?
( her virgin handmaids ) still attend the shrine .
begun with a wooing but
than dryope 's lone lulling of her child ;
another blooming son lies low,--
what power , as of a wind , bore them along ,
yet ere we give a last assent ,
hush'd the rude roar of discord , rage , and lust ,
was the great businesse both of heav'n and earth .
entranc'd and lost confusedly ,
vex with heat , noise , and dust from morn till night ,
had screw'd his rent up to the starving - place ;
did but entangle deeper their two wills ,
the triumphal arch through which i march ,
and beckons , and makes as he would speak .
where the sunlight never enters .
" some she - goat suckled thee with savage teat .
there to sing and rest :
barefoot faubourgs at the cry to arms
the saintly creatures flying , sang , and made
i will blow a thunder note
that once in bridal wreaths were worn ;
i have to say , and so for me obtain
the dewy leaves among !
to overstep a hand 's breadth the dull bounds
and thus i let you have my way ,
he falls an easy prey .
select the lines that appeal to you most .
distinctly delicate!--inhabitant
on the verdure does not settle ,
for unsought fervor , in the tangled ends
i take the lesson , wipe my brow
and bring their second wives upon the plain ;
none than john to the shop could stick closer ,
strong are the barriers round thy dark domain ,
of wit , or arms , while both contend
with lituaesaes worshipp and sydes sare ,
shook like loosened music cadent to her waist;--
e'en as its motion of necessity
mine , being made of altar - fire ,
in common things that round us lie
the desperate coasts o ' the black abyss , whence none
and a constant feeling of sweet surprise ;
but not one fish would he come to dine .
alas ! that any friend of mine
and his wishes served to guide him ;
convey'd to york , we found , at length , too late ,
and through the priest the mind inspires .
leave light upon her eyes ;
and mocked at the mother of grace ,
in the high heat of noon . simply to be ,
were lost ; his sounding voice abrupt was stay'd ;
from out one of the tombs ; wherefore i pressed ,
and i believe his only one ,
thy hyacinth hair , thy classic face ,
and do not understand , yet i can not despise
where the pine its garland weaves
bending her graceful head as half - oppressed
and fight with might and main , while i go to ilius and tell the
those solemn sounds , so soft , so clear ,
they left the raft that brought them o’er ,
the viands dress'd , and from the spits withdrawn ,
if , on a rock , by lindisfarne ,
war with her , gentle war with her , each day
but the stern goddess stands unmov'd with pray'r .
joy quickens his pulses , his hardships seem o'er ;
and i shall see my darling reign ,
not far away !
and the cliffs with lowly greeting ;
like gems that are string'd
that noble blood is written on my right side still .
mutatus ! _ the good father of us all had doubtless intrusted
all colors , flowers , and deck yourselves with them ! "
as distorted by the refraction from flemish brain to brain ,
my vigour is a new - minted penny ,
for her dear mother 's sake he loved her well,--
is seated in a place so low ,
and as they rode along ,
i gaf hem grithe , " seid oure kyng ,
to doat upon me ever !
they were so very courteous and well - bred .
i think you owe the general make - believe
a bloom of the mind
above , the chimes of church - bells toll and fade--
get no goodlier gift than these .
yesterday , later by five hours than now ,
and still would hear the sad farewell ,
breaks forth a lightning flash .
all information , as perchance , you know ,
chaste muse!--well , if you must , you must)--the veil
to judge them with his saints : him the most high
with my " _ tumpa - tumpa - tumpa - tum - pa tump ! _ "
are changed to dens of robbers , and the cowls
transmuted from the four wild elements .
while life was pleasant to thy undimmed sight ,
yea , truly is it not a sweet surprise ?
" who used to guide me to my dear . "
a statue of mars armipotent for the fountain
improvement , or of benefiting those they love or pity .
and linger only on the hues that paint
que las armas vestías ,
germina pictis
and a ' our queenis fee . "
his blood runs free and warm ;
" these , mr . magee , are the best terms you offer , then ? " asked the
with loveliness and worth !
delights them heaven , or tortures hell below ? '
" i want a picnic , " wailed susie , " and i ca n't have it . "
raised its drooping head .
ere the prelusive hymn is heard;--
" it is the note of pan ! "
' write down your name , sir , and then lisbon leave . '
fleetly from the fir - tree branches ,
of hope in early yout ' .
in all ! " ... yet ere a year he 'll draw no breath
to own for myself
there was a man , and he had nought ,
wyth whyte perle & non oþ{er } ge{m}me ,
how eerie with the curtain of the fog
upon thy forehead yet the badge of sin
let the heavens ring ;
and to her father jove , delay not , shake
when we are simply good in thought
is it the timid sigh ,
forth into the empty forest
' mid such a heavenly scene as this ,
unlock your springs.--pope .
as though , with every guardian god
slowly on his errand went .
his hoofs were carven lazulite .
d'angoisse et d'amour tombe mort aussi .
in the masterly coinage of the author of leaves of grass , a
' this morn is merry june , i trow ,
and scann'd the whole science of deep computation ,
and be a king that men may envy still . "
then varry seean t'repoort wur rais'd ,
before a world inspired .
proud signild she stands on the castle ’s high peak ,
_ glowran _ , amazed , looking suspiciously , gazing .
gadara is the country of my birth ; and i sprang of eucrates , i
yet ( saue itselfe ) it brenneth none other thynge
seized forests , vineyards , herds , and men ,
all was still .
ere casalodi 's madness by deceit
our bosoms we 'll bare to the glorious strife ,
with that terror in the eye
_ a telonio matthaeus . _ matt . ix . 9 .
it sounds to him like her mother 's voice ,
' twixt thee and me -- suspicion , that i nursed
betokens , which my guide with earnest eye
at last , i cried out :
lemnia deprenso repserunt uincula lecto .
for which thy folly strove with a better man !
breathe on it as they bow .
tyd by top & bi to þay token hy{m } sy{n}ne ,
beneath us depths unfathom'd lie ,
" i am playing war , " he told me , " and i 'm up against defeat ,
leggit , legged .
but when she heard , an anger and a grief
and his banshee 's wail -- now far and broken--
for take the tidings of thy ships and folk brought back again
that plantin for the binding ;
shall be yes for evermore .
hope nothing , i repeat ; for we
a word to aid ;
and got outside the gate as she had planned .
whelm'd in deep sands his mould'ring bones are laid .
with fire from heaven , and consume it all .
on couches , laid the noble guests , and fill'd
is the playing over - fast
is forging something violent -- and great !
they soon cut through the tree , so well had they been trained .
the noble deeds thou wrought'st are not forgot
and king both vise and great ,
and armed to battle either champion went ,
' o pardon , i thee pray !
that in the haunted garden grows
" bend down , palm . bend down , palm . "
we ripen , drop , and all is o'er ;
full of pieasure to receive me ;
cheered by that mournful requiem ,
` t was the women who in autumn
till at the last they broke
tell me is the maiden ready ,
with wild - wood blossoms drinking in the dew .
out on the frozen plain ,
bleed they themselves , or cause their foes to bleed ?
when they see my songs
wood and sadly we buried him , where the furthest headland
the landscape around is now sprinkled with flowers ,
happy son of laertes , odysseus of many devices , yea , for a
of maximin a man mai hiere ,
or , step by step , would venture near
and kindle anew the senses almost gone .
he dashed the dust , and challenged furiously
" we will go forward with this day " he answered ,
on peut etre a la fois et pompeux et plaisant ;
( her bellowing guns , and flaming pride )
skimming the towers of troy ; glad they beheld
some night , should my soul be unbound as i sleep ,
from europe 's shores advent'ring first to try
away , thou black dog , fierce and wild ,
that with every futile pass
a golden ewer the attendant damsel brings ,
of white - hot rays .
take her up tenderly ,
red from the hearts that were pierced for thee , white as thy
and come trailing along down the sky to us ,
farewell , river that made life green ,
pardon , for that so cowardly they ran ,
she gloried in that strange , terrific storm ,
the brennaghs , powrs , parcels with buckler and blade ,
where , risen from a doubtful seat and half attainted stall ,
for all the tears of blood we sow
o very sparkling of the holy spirit ,
and by her golden tresses drew
they seemed like spring and autumn . when both together seen,--
when he begot the great tirynthian groome ;
beheld this happy youthful hand ;
with sunset fire , looked drifts of snow .
cassandra ’s love he sought , with boasts of power ,
come to plunder the bonnie house of airlie .
hearken , love ! the matin choir
i know thou wilt not set a task
when the liar king ,
here be spaces meet for song ;
when hit watȝ schewed hy{m } so schene , scharp watȝ his wonder ,
our gallant ship up channel steered ,
what secret dusty chamber was it hinting ?
an emperor i lay in empire bright ,
all that depends on habitude .
than mine ?   or where the great and classic land
keeping this house alone , sell all i have ,
united states , and my hopes that your weight of state affairs may
a martyr to truth and the cause of the land ;
than now this slaughtered bird to see
leave me alone with sleep that knows
a race of counties from such blood as theirs .
belong to the same time and the same circumstances . ]
who can divine what hidden music lies
and give us good riders and plenty of room ,
but harriet would not take advice :
the vision of my boyish eyes ,
for not a leaf that falleth
that from the farthest north ,
for his will is riht wel to paie .
wi ' your rich uncle , donald gray .
to ruth somerville , that most feminine name .
like a silly fop thou'lt prate ,
may haply be never fulfill'd by his heir .
lit like a small bird on my horseman 's boot ,
till the wide veld was reeling . blurred and pale
unwonted , for traditions run ,
they hail the charming chloe ;
naught but olympian thunders ,
a vision of sin more awful and appalling
say the bells of st . ann 's .
hither repair ; of whom should any chance
to whate'er yields her joy .   of some slight good
he seats him in his loathed chair ,
which overpower all others and conduct
" our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting . "
kilrudden ruined in the gale
that heart i 'll give to thee .
be sure and meet me on the block ,
he spared not spur , he drew not rein ,
a pass is granted,--to her father sent ,
when i am dead and over me bright april
that toss the bacchic branch ,
that , when a soul is found sincerely so ,
drake told him , only somewhat , yet too much ,
that slew faustine .
unfit for public rule , or private care ,
the western point , where those half - rounding guards
trojans , where ye achaeans suffered affliction . he subdued
a parting glance -- a glimpse of dreamy eyes ,
and broadway make one with that marvellous stair
with its kindly eye
' mong shepherds gone in eld , whose looks increas'd
thou wilt be wise that day
invr'd to arms and exercis'd to arts ,
' my head is twice as big as yours ,
her sycamores and bees ,
answered de brent , most forward still
ma y be heard within the village ,
yet fearless with nature 's own innocent grace ,
of its black eddy bespate with flakes and spumes .
as skyward stream'd the electric fire
they heard the voice of thalaba ;
when the tempter me pursu'th
that sacred fruit , sacred to abstinence ,
something mighty and weird and dim
of prentices , green madams , and cut - purses
for they began to lose their velvet light ;
like devils in grain peck away .
why envies the bird the streaming verses of hafiz ?
then looking down to earth say , " _ i was there ! _ "
--the dragon to its own hesperides--
in easy rhyme , and phrases neatly fitting .
that it ne comth out ate laste ;
and it still kept up its halloo .
between 4000 and 5000 lyric poems . he flourished throughout
reflected what his mind was , then went out
this warld 's wealth when i think on ,
dying , not mortal overmuch ;
within ourselves -- to - day .
no doubt i should to his request agree .
i oft have met her slowly wandering
within the circle where it was before ,
than half of one across .   they brought me down
and we shall have snow ,
you must buy it with blood again ! "
' twas laid with tenderest care .
little lad , little lad , and who 's for an airing ,
he bowed upon the cross . the temple 's veil
ages of war have filled these plains with fear ;
the ends and upshots of events below ?
and creatures for his pleasure slain .
sweet suns and happy rains !
but when at length those traces failed ,
and those forms of old admiring ,
there , while the huntsmen pitch their toils around ,
full to avenge my husband . / who him from me hath ta'en ,
below was movement , battling of armed men ,
the who s nature prively
that breaks the gable wall ;
as i journeyed on ; but i climbed one day ,
and to the king of crete he strawhte
when harold 's plume floats up the flash of spears .
for why thou left'st me nothing in thy will :
my heart was sure she was the one . and then
thought of the two poets conversing under the vines at arqua ;
aeuro ~ by god , thou liest , aeuro(tm ) quod he ,
and briers for corn - sheaves giving
my judgments seal the dead past with its dead
and clink of shovels deepening the shallow trench .
fer tarts is few that makes the ideel wife .
in holy chant thrice shorted forth aloud :
twas not in fight they bore him down ; he never cried amàn ;
and surely it were little praise to me
made the distant hills re - echo
and therefore it is fact -- not fiction -- that i tell .
that three had been reduced to two ;
thus hailed by black devils , who capered for joy !
like kindly rain , our hearts to cheer ?
to cretheus wedded next , the lovely nymph
and the waiters served so slow ?
and the flowers , i bade you see ,
" ah ! come , lest i despair ; "
then in came the cuckoo ,
heard , how orestes hath renown acquired
maintain’d the walls , and mann’d the lofty towers :
condemn'd to misery worse than death ?
but even so he did not escape destruction , for minerva had
with menelaus in decision fierce
that we have heeded duty 's call , and taken up our part .
one would hear so very oft ?
for if one thousandth part may be defin’d
called here , enlarging on the devil,--
she laughed , and vanished like a humming - bird .
like mists that flee
flowe pretious teares , as seemes she doth bewaile
and it ai n't to a little i 'll strike .
all about the house .
their leader,--his will was his horse 's will .
awe with all its silent stars .
then smiling eyes bend over mine ,
for ungirt loins and lamps unlit ;
bowed in reverent awe , and then
" you are not wise , but i am .
the banner which a soldier bore ,
lay covered almost up to her nose .
was telamonian ajax , while wrath - bound
the child upon her knee ,
exist .
jes lak ole br'er rabbit
arma amens capio , nec sat rationis in armis
who patiently had listened , thus replied:--
through whose ill counsel in the world no more
" where did you say he 'd been ? "
he rose and 1ooked forth to see the fray ,
for we , which now behold these present days ,
and bless the power that still delights to bless ,
welcome the rich borders of rivers , table - lands , openings ,
come , cruel one ! come and behold the oppression
woe ne'er assails in vain ;
gush'd forth , a fount for ever flowing ;
thee for a good and true man : thou art worthy of
the prince with his feather .
anseïs the rash , gerard de roussillon
the breeze fresh springing from the lips of morn ,
her dress completed , from her chamber forth
and this is what the women bear
gives with new life her filial train to rise ,
he shall seek for timber for him ,
( in the new world 's first dawning spring , )
and in a temple saw , methought , a crowd
given in vain to make a food for those
yet still my niche is not so cramped but thence
fudge : cook in a small heavy saucepan ; pour mixture into a
pants on her neck , and fans her parting hair .
and if they are not walking now ,
called " synalepha " ) as in :
amid the ruins of that hour
the holly into blazes woke
tendió sus brazos lívidos , ahogando
i tried to sing , i tried to pray ,
near yair .
look where the gipsy 's tent is spread ,
they are coming into bloom again !
if i should look for the time o ' day
on polish'd stone before his palace gate ;
murmur of paris outside ;
and washed his limbs with oil , and from the hold
izqui , xiv , 8 . as many as .
gusts whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and
may not be controverted ! "
" i will tell you the truth , my son , " replied ulysses . " it was
fair f -- z -- r was there , and the beautiful p -- k -- r
awakened love 's deep pulses
all have perished in manala . "
but since friends grow not thick on every bough ,
i fain would foot it for a span
swift sped the ship , and glad at heart were all ,
the frightened horse , with broken rein ,
that is the image of the son of god .
and he who serves it has a name to see
prevalent among the north american indians , of a personage of
the girl that i 'm enamored of
leader of his people .
untroubled by the deep disgrace , —
all the world behind us waned into vaguest remoteness ;
to coroner merival . the coroner
noble presumptions to mankind 's renown ;
audiences .
would think of more than common pleasure ;
the wind thrusts them into flamelets .
as sentinels ' of space along the way.--
sought a place to build a smithy ,
another service , and another scene ;
across the pasture sod
life 's wild extremes;--their trials were his own !
which our very joys shall leave ,
o'er his boyish locks of brown .
there stuck aloft in public view ,
the space below the bunks as black as coal ,
do n't waste it again on a live bird , i pray .
but yet i could not get him free;--
" without one glimpse of reason or of heaven--
friend scipio , i read that too . and though at the first i found
but prejudice was rampant in every shop and field ;
three little heads , all sunny ,
" just yours and mine--'tis fun to be alive ! "
his love , generated . the living light in the son , emanating from
by the rhine , wondrous rhine ;
and sith his throat
thus addresses youkahainen :
and grappled at the fell , as one who mounts ,
of priam 's regal crown for other brows--
the cock 's shrill clarion , or the echoing horn ,
and i am torn ' twixt love of you and her--
why should n't it shelter foolishness as well ?
like to do ;
that by my cursed rede
but to read of , depicted by exquisite james ,
now christmas eve returning ,
yond vessel that tussels the ocean to plough ,
this knight than dwelled fayre at home ,
reaches the tents of the myrmidons in his murderous course , and
why you could never understand ,
fyrst telle me þe tyxte of þe tede lettres ,
was returned by margaretta .
that she had made her bed between :
was n't blue - blooded , yet
for the navies of the sea and air
tho ' sore oppressed they 're still the chosen few :
god of our fathers , known of old--
shining o'er athens ; to which their course they set
that all that flowerage clothed as flesh clothes bone ,
here and there throughout the valley
with some mystical knowledge enormous
against his soul struck solemn notes of pain .
envelop'd in the mist , that from the stream
all these in their peculiar ways give forth
how the british regulars fired and fled,--
but ay procede in this theyr lewde errour
for that we forward go with might
fled , while the robber swept his flock away ,
it knows naught of language , but a story can tell
sus anchos cimientos lame ,
er i may stonde of plesaunce in degree
white as the gleam of a receding sail ,
thy simple self were lovelier far--
" i think of chatterton , the marvellous boy ,
where noble chariots gleam and flare :
though you 've risen from the ditch
had been shot in a duel with the _ red striped hawthorn _ .
of intricate and interlaced veins
he only knew that what he saw was light !
yet , in opinions look not always back ;
of aromatic sassafras ;
and her unblemished innocence displayed ;
" odyssey " was familiar with the old sican city at the top of mt .
when the mercury went down . "
good wine and best of bread ;
my blood would stain the heather .
put a little in my purse and leave me free .
and as the glow burns ruddiest o'er the wave ,
let not the world continue thus in laughing me to scorn .
alas ! the flattering pride is o'er ;
of him whose destiny has heard its doom :
to court her in a silver shower .
where monasteries like gray shrouds stand--
quid tam parua loquor ? moles pulcherrima caeli
more secret from my eyes , more variant
choose thee an angel , lord ; it were enough . thy son
in two , and suffer for the rest of me .
or bending of the bitter bow , hurling tough darts afar
the robin 's tame that was so free .
if so ? it must befal
among the mental pow'rs a question rose ,
dost thou not rule the realm of israel ?
and think'st thou jove himself with patience then
all dreamily it opes its jaws
“ have you not seen them ? let ulysses tell
you gave me a goblet , which at a touch
that nature has given the lovely young man :
possesses lately , thither to arrive
where other suns prompt other dreams ,
of good ambassadors , that they may frame
appearing in a dream , to rouse the careless man :
but neither time nor penury
picture when scanned
and all our small desire .
or brethren bold , marphisa terrified .
" through human wisdom , and th ' authority
extends so far , that it meridian makes
from crown to swelling root
puss shook like a leaf , in her boots ,
for ' tis a truth well know to most ,
they would not go without a leech , whose skill
in the hush of the mahirn woods .
distant harvest - carols clear ;
where the souls of mortals mate ,
forty yeahs terday ;
my life you ask of ? why , you know
for there the grass was trodden down
but deemed by others to have preached and taught
it 's a fact o ' wich ther 's bushils o ' proofs ;
are fluttering like black banners overhead
and not an ear was found too dull to drink the music in .
the daisies all have gone to sleep ,
the witches , the broomsticks , the cats , and all ;
or like the bird that 's here to - day ,
how can i best describe thy charms ?
hath two ordain'd , who should on either hand
and proud and dashing cavaliers ;
and slaughter .
hands off o ' the sons o ' the widow ,
and set free my spirit 's wings .
but to his roscius , muse , my nyk restore .
but every night and every day
from underneath his helmet flow'd
flash deep and rare in wondrous hue ,
what was it , that passed like an ominous breath--
his leap across the sea once more ;
that thought was this : ` allas ! sin i am free ,
and heard the prayer the hangman 's snare
your sunshine touched it for an hour ; it blossomed but to die .
there 's no food
in cultur'd garden , free , uncultur'd flows ,
waited five years , waited six years ,
sits by her tire and builds her hope in heav'n .
for in the east the reddening sky
--such pleasure is to one kind being known
then strike your camp an ' go , the rains are fallin ' ,
and looks in the gulf so black ,
i , as wooer , perhaps may come
this the treasure i have brought thee ,
this , of true penitents the chief ,
or room or entrance . "--"hast thou seen , " said he ,
and weave my little tomb ,
soon you 'll never dress in white ,
usquabae , usquebae , whisky .
the description left by wood and aubrey of the end of lovelace
you 'd know her at a glance , i think ;
that 's what they used to sing along the roads last spring ;
et simas tenero collidit pollice naris .
and spear be ready for the field . ”
we sank our anchor solemnly
by men ' at scarce wur fit te stand i ' t ' porch ,
murder again . no worst oriental despot , assuring
let bacchus crown his fall ;
is not pleased with this creation ,
' mong the dews of the morning ;
release await them . first the youth it was
o god , wilt thou stand by me
thei tuo remuen alle vice ,
only i know these things leaned over me ,
how may joy dawn ?   in what undreamed - of hour ,
that shields thee from the day 's fierce glow ?
and often — ay , ’ tis so —
up to the heavens ; night into chaos sank .
the smallest rose - leaf on the ground ,
i have no name to give it !
as but the off - scouring of the british sand ;
she rises , with the space half filled with light
to look on her once more ;
his most enchanted ear .
to write you such as once , when i was young ,
that something of its marvellous mirth and might
to give them their ordinary appellation , the " runts , " are
perchance thou art always of this mind , and so thou dost
great souls grow bolder in their country 's cause ,
but quick - eyed love , observing me grow slack
i stand here in my place ,
oh sister ? ' cross the seas--
' tis almost midnight ,
in the glade 's midst , each on his mat ,
and grace learns new , sweet meanings from her grace ;
yet i 'll not leave you without a present , if only to show you
shall i compare thee to a summer 's day ?
some flew over the cuckoo 's nest . "
the world is determined to keep him down low . "
celebrities , the chief of which latter class i found ,
to save the lord the trouble .
strong silent greens serenely lingering ,
" keep the chestnut of the fire with the hand of the cat . "
her neck and nut - brown hair .
so , in late autumn,--'twas a marvellous morn ,
between them against the diseases of each year . "
ursula , takes by favour
with falssemblant and coverture
" he did but what all artists do ,
and simple truth his utmost skill !
the elvish cups that spring upsets
drove away , with scoffs and shoutings ,
assailed the king in tears . their masque and ball
many were the gray - pike taken
for he is quick to see and understand . "
their ballads were the same , --
therefore , my heart , go hence in high ,
the kyng seyd : aeuro ~ be seynt adryan~ ,               f. 92a .
fits of joy and fits of pain--
tuwhit ! tuwhoo ! a merry note !
where the raven croaked loud like the ploughman ill - bred ,
and they remember him with beauty caught
but i will bring my court afar ,
self - pledged , in love to live and die .
and passion with rejected veil ,
live fountains and rough grass , my line invoke :
ye soar those elder saints to meet
a growl of fierce approval answered him ,
mynwennoedd bu braenar ,
in short , their toes so gentle to amuse ,
to draw his sword , and both of life bereave ;
and it 's better than this by a damsite--
turne we ageyn to rede
ffrawddus , a phreiddiau ewiar .
antehac nefas depromere caecubum
i too have felt the wild - bird thrill of song behind the bars ,
crying , " i am orestes , " and alike
_ chor . _ and stills the bride , too , when she cries .
of seven smooth joints a mellow pipe i have ,
he , puffed with new - won royalty and proud ,
our courage does never fail .
if you will join the dixie band , etc .
appearance ; and within an hour the number of those on deck was
but when he found
and sodden beams , once soaked to season strong .
the sheriff is aware that sherwood forest
no law could bridle his own proud self - will .
oh , head that lay on my bosom . . .
by this shall all men know ,
and i within the haunted place
good lord , they 've got to be ,
with your brow toward the west ?
or soothe the sad inevitable hour ,
they must have darted from a _ sphere _ ,
made traitor , robber , parricide : the woes
are daphne 's cheeks ,
all the wild fancies that thought can bring
jingled like a carriage - horse when he went abroad .
to mark the bride by partial father praised ,
beneath these lands a river waits to bless
i was just turned twenty - one ,
your well - timed thunder never sours its zest .
her ruby cheek , white neck , and raven hair ;
tried to slay me with his weapons .
your heart worthy of love,--since it knows how to love . "
so without least impulse or shadow of fate ,
sweet tones are remember'd not ;
sleep is a reconciling ,
we rush undaunted to the bloody fray ;
the midmost , thence to shout to either side ,
reclining on his hand .
_ fountain _ : " no , but you called me a laughing hyena , and said i
hast thou wandered near the ocean ?
with self - respecting art :
hardships endure and gravest dangers brave
if thou fill'st it of the small ,
in small proportions we just beauties see ,
according to custom , once more i appear
besides i 'm not at all prepared,--
with great deliberation rose ,
with battle shout like rolling drums ,
" why , o my father , offering us no aid ? "
so hardly won , so grudgingly bestowed ? nay , nay ;
against sin ; fourth , the remission of sin . it must be accompanied
and when thy hands unfold a genuine ancient scroll ,
returning virtue brings back glorious light .
that from heaven , or near it ,
our ship must sail the faem ;
can it be that i have lived
and here 's the child 's dad
in fields , aloft , the whirling car to guide ,
i might have loved him -- he had wondrous eyes .
i thought he had come from one of you
and says not a word of that which it means .
then spake she to the king and said ' o sire ,
blended with heather ,
the world is a blank -- there is only
as her soul would have her face
not bin ;
' what must now be added to it ,
and feed their fibres with reviving dew .
to stay the foe from fooling ,
with notions all at random caught ,
from all things living , man except .
that none but social spirits know ,
then went to bed in tears .
the oath of battle , burning for the fray .
' " oh , sir , " she says , " are you a physician ? we have none . "
" _ but think not you the brae to speel ;
and cleped is unkindeschipe ,
that it could rend from wall of battered town
and call'd his father 's ghost , from hell restor'd .
her voice obey ; yet the effect of all
' in looking at objects of nature while i am thinking , as at
where the sea - king held his revels
the lot upon his chance fell .
all life , a useless empty dream ;
dying put on the weeds of dominic ,
but his gown was heavy , and held him back ,
his rede the heroes followed / and tourneyed in full stately way .
differing so , deserts agree .
ah ! summer sun and autumn frost ,
whose mighty hand saint remy 's hand did keep
toward the sun his hands were lifted ,
withers the damask cheek , unnerves the strong ,
is now the hive where , on their flowery rounds ,
she could not find her hospodar
of your stingy promise , must that not quench his imaigin'd
nor miss of the reproof , which that implies ,
th ' effect of fancy , or an idle dream ,
wrest it a thousand times ; for , if it yield
then is my soule with life and love inspired :
' bett'ring yourself , i hope , jim , ' said the master ;
tall , ungainly , gaunt of limb ,
then he seeks his bed of rushes ,
and snatch a grace beyond the reach of art ,
clad in robes of hodden gray ,
and ruddier than the gown
and--"she hath flown ! "
and the lance - tips they are sharpening . "
he cut his neck in twain , flesh , skin and bone ,
they made such a strife ,
say it surely will come true !
to which your young leaves shiver ? do ye strive
the fields i deemed were graves of worshipped kings
small need of inroad , or of fight ,
fellow - laborers in life , let them slumber in death ,
" whatever boon he craves ,
netle in , dokke out , now this , now that , pandare ?
what is it thou hast seen ? or what hast heard ? "
through artery and vein ;
here we talk of old books , and old friends , and old times ;
where the young grass was soft and green ;
paul 's when he was in london . "
within here , for the soul asserts
it is a lofty thought , o guardian love !
proclaim their gentle ecstasies .
which when i question'd of ,
seated upon her tapestry - stool ,
if thou but newly art arriv'd below .
calmly i heard the dreadful sound ;
they were true glory 's stainless victories ,
the music low and sweet
are never stern with womankind .
came by the silver way ;
errare atque viam palantis quaerere vitae .
them down to destiny .
pray , hurt him not , though he be dead ,
' deflere non te vernulae pudet mortem ?
joy supreme of the sun 's day dream ,
wine - dark sea , a fair land and a rich , begirt with water ,
tears sudden gush'd:--“o , goddess - born!--he cries ,
who can look undazzled up where the norn is riding , --
encouraging aloud his band , whose hearts
i rarely go from home,--no , not a word
thereby to keep us ever poor .
a refuge to the neighbouring poor
the earth seemed to love her ,
together hasting , as erewhile to wrath .
_ vide _ mrs . buxton .
and ye , my mates , do unto me with her
and the spring - laden breeze
still , when life has long departed ,
beside me , in her chair .
tender thoughts her glances fill ;
that the carcass will furnish an excellent soup ,
above spread the poplar and linden their shade ,
sawing the sunlight with your sultry saw .
to those who loved her well in former days
he was a relic of the past ,
she answered , " only seven ! "
in letters , which she sent him , all she felt ,
there was a monkey climbed up a tree
remember his deliberate happiness .
remaining honour celebrate .
as their illustrious master had enjoined ,
to go double at everything ;
chorus of merry voices .
i went to a tavern in the town ,
" nay , he knows better than turn oot ,
ever grateful for the prize ,
it is a place where dreams convene ,
that none will undertake the task , alone
to make them to his troubles hark .
become the saviours of the rest . "
who stops to plunder at this signal hour ,
is later born than thou ; and as he meets
i only waked to sob and scream .
thy sweetness all near me , so distant to - day ;
how calm o'er this great water , in its flow
where it gurgles and gushes , then flows on its way
and while the fates so fair ordain ,
receive this offering of our hairs ;
and lovely is the rose ;
" lead him forth to the cross ! " she cried , and he stood
twenty raw canadians are tasting life again !
his sins and follies here he did bemoan ,
of bloody - footed dogs that gnawed the traces ,
her goodness was beyond renown ,
lighting up the woods around them ;
where’er a startled peacock flew ,
wal , it 's a marcy we 've gut folks to tell us
" no mate , no comrade lucy knew ;
as ever silver - tipt the side of shady mountaine .
thou wilt not be in haste to go.--
brown owl sat on a caraway tree ,
thus seide his herte and spak withinne :
unfrowning caryatides .
when he left his pretty boy ,
if they stood still because they saw his shadow ,
no gentle feelings warm that soul of thine ;
through the worlds endles ages to survive .
whose cloudy brow at once is calm again ,
around the grave of the high - king :
bring to me the moose of juutas ;
till he languished long in prison ,
first a human figure standing ,
hush , and disturb her not . go . summon first
the dew of the morning
worn in a vision and melted away at waking .
let it not tell your judgement i am old ;
waves ; " steres " being taken as the feminine adjectival
pale dilutions of the waters of the world
and do not fear i shall creep to - night
gentle ladies , wedded ladies ,
because she with a lover 's wish complied ,
search my most hidden breast ! by truth 's own tongue ,
even in the softest feather bed that e'er
little robin flew away ;
that egg , and in the cradle watch .
thereat down from the stair - head sir hagan shouted loud ,
i defy ye ta find sitch a pick’d lot o ’ men .
take all their mailëd pomp and pride
through the dark cloud , no longer darts its rays .
why should i name the land that flees from me ?
the rocks and sea - sand with the kiss of peace ;
lied like the devil to hush up scandal
' twas merry ' mid the blackwoods , when we spied the station roofs ,
affliction ; too bitter was the woe .   and , in the wisdom of his
within thy depths , o aromatic forest ! lies .
introduced ( in a more philosophical form , and freed from all its
the females , too , he warmly kiss'd ;
feigning like froth shall go ,
( aka " the contest of homer and hesiod " )
oh , to - morrow will be friday , so we 'll warm our souls to - day !
toothless and tremulous , how many times
yield melodies for angel - audience meet ,
else had engulfing seas entombed the whole .
in a gold bowl , we see ,
comrade , yet a little further i would go before the night
let 's have laughing--
down the road ' e led you there is no returnin ' ,
yet neither life nor death should end
right glad was the raven , and off he went fleet ,
the cauld mool mony a bosom bears ,
as i went to bonner
these were the things we wished would go ;
moon - beams play upon the scene ,
out of what liquid is thy laughing made ?
some priests and poor i saw ,
shrieks and sighs were blended many hours ,
beneath her shepherd 's haunted pillow laid ,
if i ca n't think strangely , i can at least look queerly .
his stature reacht the skie , and on his crest
forgive me , freedom ! o forgive those dreams !
which may not of the other heirs be said .
agencies the direct action of the poem is accomplished ; while the
another hand the standard wave ,
where the sober - colored cultivator smiles
mosque , portico , and palace , went to ground ;
to lust , or set their honesty at pawn ,
to those apostates , least the like befall
his lazy acts and broken words my lips
beat from our limbs these flowery chains
as high as he was able ;
shall play the wanton in thy face ;
in all the earth who loveth thee
hasten thine hour and halt not , till thy work be done .
provided thus , he to the stables came ,
than if the soldan had the town assaulted .
and with darkness clothed and guarded ,
gazed on dardanian priam , and , at length
( seeds , when they exist , are bitter )
just as he reached the landing , lion cried ,
their children herein follow them , and choosing princes here ,
so pleased was i with what i 'd seen him do ,
" that was the day of our great feast , " said nash ,
the dark threw its patches down upon me also ,
" stranger , " sez digger , " be the cut uv ' i m. "
that last , that defenceless look .
past ills enhance the comforts of repose .
you 're but some cobbling brother .
one - half vineyard and the other open plough - land . the old warrior
when heavy dews are laden with disease ,
courage from that his eager rush to war .
the governor has saved you . "
wilt thou refuse the charms of youth
and innocence , which most does please
the deep root is , faith fails .
yourselves like brave men , and shun dishonour in one another 's
" well , no , " she says , " but could he be divorced
once source of fond maternal joy ,
dull with the ritual and records of death ,
and my heart went cold ,
there 's a four - pronged buck a - swinging in the shadow of my cabin ,
he fell aback as one made weak .
now that the whole thing ends ,
roses to me for aye !
front !   the faces of the women in the ' ouses
to all delight of human sense expos'd
who sin so oft have mourn'd , yet to temptation ran ?
the cold command of death .
yet by that little i beheld the stars
ah , woe to women death passes o'er !
best and soonest whence and what thou art .
fu ' loud the wind blaws frae the ferry ,
emerging on the green hill - side .
such as would souls of trouble lure ;
so long as on that point , whate'er it was ,
wherein she suffering , all her spirits languish ,
there is the cave with the hyaline halls by it--
wrought with all flowers for all men 's heart 's delight .
o'er thy grave , all glowing ,
in the fir - tree where he slumbered ;
altius inseruit digitos , qua spiritus ingens
yielding to this warlike foe ,
gentleness and the elevation of mind connected with these sacred
wanting thy well - lov'd lovely presence anywhere .
leads me over ganges ' streams ,
make more strong and firm beneath me ! "
so did he vow , ' o , then will i remember ,
because because was just because ,
soaring and flapping of its spires ? have you never , with a
among the levës grene ,
or bathe in blood the settled , steel - clad ranks ?
receptacle of dead , to impassable
where sorrow treads on joy ,
i see two angels winging ,
he saw the gopher working in his burrow ;
so that water from the branch'll
and i 'm your god , and you 're my man . "
_ sometime _ i know i shall rise and soar
the rose , the violet,--one day
of the sect called presbyterian ,
on seeing a beautiful print of a shipwrecked sailor sitting on
had not the great sun seen , i might ;
and whan the cite was a slepe ,
have i offended you ? and i will make amends to - day .
of weaknes , she may write ' resolv'd ' at length .
and pestilence comes in and blocks our ways
" now , valiant lycomede ! exert your might ,
so what 's the odds if i does go lean ,
which made an end of the cadmean name .
" o master ! we are seven . "
"         from inequality in its execution
as beauty to the bridegroom 's e'e--
slaves , and priests that slew them -
we reached the earth with glee .
which have the power to turn the heart to god
ay los mis ojuelos !
a dozen steps -- she climbs the hill ,
bourdeaux , or neat french white , or alicant . "
to where , a ghost with empty hands ,
the next morning , at breakfast , the parlour - maid again announced
new - trimmed in heaven , nor than his steadfast mood
oh ! the loneliness touches everything ,
awakening up , he took her hollow lute,--
" dora had once been told
but on the fourth no more it raved !
but briton ’s brave sons amongst them made havoc ,
( and this is how we twanged it ) -
o mad arachne , so i saw thee already half spider , wretched on
would miss its fragrant smell ,
wi ' my good lord beside me ;
to where the path of chill december ends .
o my girl , i can see ' tis in trouble you are ;
untouched by favour , ire , and hate ,
while , as his flying fingers kiss'd the stings ,
" well , i am about to die . "
then thought many a warrior : / " were it likewise granted me
in a warm crevice of the bark
to put his wits into a kind of trammels .
another head or arm , or leg and thigh .
is in thy heart and on thy face .
and nokomis , the old woman ,
to pour out her world of bliss
for pain , death , sorrow , sent
those cruel beauties that have slain
least the tympanum is then better adapted to assist their
dr . o. pughe translates the line in the gododin thus —
freeze my touch ; yes , freeze . "
to puzzle him on the discovery that they arise from
white flocks with downy fleeces . for the ram ,
though better far my tongue had held its peace ,
your amarant wreaths were earned ; and homeward all ,
till the emu lays an egg ! "
each face when at the wicket snapped .
with old anton as their coachman .
but ' t made me mighty mad when that
they took in joy , reproach , surprise ,
" who is most wretched in this dolorous place ?
then the palace , to dome ,
butler , samuel -- born in 1612 ; the son of a substantial farmer in
beyond all need of tenderness and care ;
do love you , holy christabel !
near by a soft - haired lamb stood gazing along the bank .
that gladschipe he hath al forsake .
when others found them mute .
and night came , moving in mad flame :
but wrought upon his mood and hugged him close .
chasmed and steepened sheer to infinite space .
" be all at rest , " for rest alone becometh
which hallows ev'n a name .
crash and scatter it asunder ;
was naked of me , when within these walls
all things should be heard gladly and considered ,
who wins his love shall lose her ,
infinite , that no greek shall find his bones
i stood on the shore when the moon hung low
the " horn of fortune " would be at the wall .
are wedded thus , like beauty to old age ,
was he afraid , or tranquil ?
no wrong to him who tills its pleasant fields
they know not old northumberland
nor vow nor hecatomb unpaid on us
like magic mirrors , where slumbering lay
i find this pardon pardons not ;
sublimity .
blown on and drifted by sclavonian winds ,
where thunders meet .
there is no gift to offer , or undo ;
put us in prison and steal our estates ,
swath'd in confining fire . "--"master , thy word , "
how she wears on her bosom a brown rosary ,
who were their chiefs .
which christ 's illuminating spirit sheds ,
' tis we , not they , who are in fault ,
late arrival at the feast ,
wherof thou schalt thiself be povere ,
some night i 'll crash into that window pane
the last , black remnant of so bright a line :
the morn had now dispell'd the shades of night ,
i must , enforced by high constraint ,
for they worry about the wars to be fought
hence with denial vain and coy excuse :
on the red right hand of odin !
and talked to me for full an hour ,
“ tiber at length beheld her ; with her toil ,
into the hollows . once , as up a drift
' beat the war drums . call the warriors .
thy travels dost thou boast o'er foreign realms ?
iure sui pondus nulla statera tenet .
i turned in dignity as if
by that long hunt ; " and then he sought to shake
and some the architect : his hand was known
leaves there its cares and is at rest ;
you 'd think , to hear some people talk ,
fell on the people , and they cried ' amen ! '
" a truth of such undoubted weight , "
so shall we see with what degrees it came ;
and in their perilous fall shall thunder , " god ! "
and guard him amidst toils and strife ,
gave up the weary head to rest ,
he cares not -- yet , prithee , be kind to his fame .
þon he sylfa eart                quam se ipsum .
i have therto be diligent .
second daughter of the northland .
broad , massive , high , and stretching far ,
encompass'd , and antinoüs thus began .
so faces on two decks look back ,
yet lives the voice , and thou shalt hear how plain
the halls that were thronged once with star - browed immortals ,
with his fishing - line of cedar ;
till such a wild heart rending moan hath risen ,
who did these things ?
adjure him by his father ’s silver hairs ,
the woman with the serpent 's tongue .
and i will meet thee there , bonny mary o !
sweet london in this happy month of may !
with calchas at aulis he gave the moment for cutting the first
keep the trojans in check longer . they had built it to protect
and creaking ropes the creaking ropes oppose ;
to where yon taper cheers the vale
" mark the rapid motion
spake again wise wainamoinen ,
whylest seeking to aslake thy raging fyre ,
" e'en now i seem to view . "   from the other side
its smoking cloud of agonies ,
loved her better , and forgave her .
a huge stone we beheld , of which nor i
untaught by trial , unconvinced by proof ,
have not eaten such as thou art ;
" o prophet , pardon him ! "
i am a shadow , and i see none . _
some ask for envied power ; which public hate
and forth to pasture send the bristly care .
they ' ve right men in derry , no doubt ;
over painted , over lovely--
" how many are you , then , " said i ,
on instruments as like as drum to drum .
on daphne 's cheek grow rose and cherry ,
looke ever lovely , as becomes you best ;
_ page _ 109.--the mountain lake . see note to page 17 .
before he wore a glove .
for god thou has known fear , when from his side
and give you kisses by the dozen .
which lifts the changèd heart high up ,
the price of a white man slain ;
for if we cast them on the flowing stream ,
can drive the blood back to the stricken heart ?
and i feel the throb of nature 's heart
than others do , or i did heretofore?--
i can not clear the five - bar gate ;
then iron slumber fell on him , hard rest weighed down his eyes ,
and fitting is it thou shouldst learn thy part ,
and where , oh where are the light footsteps gone ,
poor in its need to be possess'd ,
shall e'er make good .   nations that were to live
free institutions and of protestantism . _ capita vix duabus
hath melted like snow in the glance of the lord !
a hundred years ago .
the glory of mood where human frailty failed ,
beside the trestled temple down--
thirteenth a favorable wind arose and they went on to troy . "
from the wine - press redly flows .
to lancaster 's bold duke the damsels sue ;
' twas the crowning cry of a heart 's despair , and it thrilled you
in one awful waterspout ! "
i pray you , show me
london 's sole tower might laugh their strength to scorn !
worms are gnawing at my vitals ,
any complaints to make ?   lots of 'em -- one of 'em 's you .
no statesman nor soldier to plot or to fight ,
for a pillow is my right hand doughty ? "
i canna sleep a wink , lassie , vol . v. , 183 .
no war , or battle 's sound ,
i know not if i should speak to him or keep silent .   why did he
o happy lover , happy maid ,
and soon the braggart north will feel
" than hell--'tis nothing while _ he _ knows it not .
almost as soon as seen:--and lo !
for silly childishness,--at last
that slumbered , mirrored in the blue ,
he murmured texts with lying art ,
an ' takin ' dem up to da wall een hees hand !
how great soe'er the splendor of gunther 's marriage day ,
nothing could have my love o'erthrown ,
the huddling trample of a drove of sheep
and now is swung from side to side . "
then , like an apparition of a dream ,
drums , trumpets , and goodness knows what !
through mony a weary way ;
per quod arcanum tua cestus halat ,
that human hearts appall !
but never more they saw the man
i 've found a tragedy for you . have you heard
to keep me happy all the day .
so fades , the sea appears a shoreless flood .
and at the altar plight their faith -- each heart
you 're a major . "
folk hoed the wheat , and clipped the vine in trust
hoarse ravens join the strain .
and in her silent patience loved him more :
short,--most completely represented by wordsworth and by shelley .
and i tried to take their stings
" of mere cold water , for his sake
i parts ; an ' ' e stands grinnin ' at me still ;
and yet my great concern was this
let 's now take our time ,
and he spoke the words which follow ,
which please a moment and forever die .
and mix their loathsome ordures with their meat .
thou shalt be left : for that almighty king ,
sadly he mused upon the world ,
in his clashing jaws he thrust it ,
here , here at least the dawn hath power to bring
win me and wear me                     _ lady 's slipper . _
down goes the top at once ; the greeks beneath
or he might then have sung with right good will .
and their reliefe ingloriously delay’d :
only an ideal purport in which the significance of the
where now this night is day ,
" come , sailors , for the time in the harbour is over ! "
till it stood in all the splendor
blent with velvet and with silk ;
o cruel fair ,
i had not strength to hold .
the laurels are all cut ,
to the south were heard the echoes ,
the shackled soul and hand are free ;
and were ' t not for the nature of the place ,
great credit promised to the schools . )
plasma dei potuisse mori .
the judases of this touchstone age
on blood from human veins they feed ,
bedding .
allusions , because they illustrate the character of the grecian
finery , haughtiness do not entice me . does one not lift a
glancing , wavering , and dying ,
accursed , of blessed ? hide me from the face
oght elles more in this degre ,
they played hide - and - seek , they played marbles and tag ,
but this thy host so wide dispread
cleombrotus ; and many more too long ,
yon turf , fringing the margent of the stream ,
there was an old person of sheen ,
and thereby conceive the immense -- such multiple extent
and laughed untel she like to died !
hosts numberless , each lord in size
and tremulous tells how lovely still must be
where the plains and scrubs are wide ,
alone and lonely in this little world :
i saw and heard , and knew at last
lucasta held their torch ; thou gav'st it light .
" ... and george eliot ? " we ask lightly .
the rivers an ' the mountains , too ,
the women are saying .
these and with these and the breath of my chant ,
here are sweet peas , on tiptoe for a flight :
sleep little baby , hush little baby ,
soon became a thriving merchant ;
" this is the place wherein you may assuage
in showing deeds of mercy , in knowledge of the truth ,
of the wondrous journey by us ,
this while i to the amorous youth am we d ,
unclasped the warrior - son of her who brings
we love by nature what he hates ;
the twilit hush a pillared gleam .
golly ! if it ai nt like tearin
but chance could not be always trusted , quite ,
dismissed with every honour due
unaccustomed emotion in the mind ; what we knew before , we can not
music , like shadows from the joy of her ,
no ! my soul might be dark ,
like were the tears they wept , so like that one
" ah , the saints'll be kapin ' me petticoats clean ! "
of many - nationed spoilers from the po
fierce lightnings blazing in his face .
into the source and limit of all good ,
i will follow thee .
his pencil , the thin pencil , dropped -- a crack
with voices sad , where feasters are ,
to curse the fare of his abstemious school ,
birds , either plovers or martins -- some say swifts . in
but make allowance for their doubting too ;
a letter -- cherished as no other--
who there falls into prayer for ecstasy
to him throughout many a year ;
and harriet beecher , whose glowing pen
_ mephistopheles _ . would i 'd a happier tale for your ear !
here was no useless sacrifice .
rose and relapsed across eternity ,
when the leaves of the sheoaks are traced on the gold ,
of paradise , among the glorious !
e'en the gods in heavenly dwelling
writers that were then fashionable in the dutch universities .
ther mai men hiere schipmen crie ,
mine is the heavenly hue of azure skies ,
enter then within your chambers in the rich and quiet light ;
a - shu is eighteen :
the small slain body , the flowerlike face ,
they raised the hue and cry :
deserves the worst , his conduct 's less defensible ,
in sorrow rather than in sound , a chime
nor shall we gainsay god 's decree ;
a loss to us--_joe miller _ to _ boulogne _ .
i hear a haggard student turn and sigh :
no wicked death shall he die .
so end the three first scenes . in the next ( the castle of st .
is perhaps the reverse
as they loud proclaimed the flight
" every little wing of wind ,
safely to land in the night .
beautiful maidens .
how well my native talent is displayed
at doers of a desperate thing ?
upon the air "                louise chandler moulton
are the goodly treasures he taketh with him out of the
my suit , and spare me ! never have i word
thy wrath asswage thou in especyall
time 's the shuttle , life 's the yarn .
if my heart riot--
and all the mountain torrents swell with blood !
case .
o god of silence ,
consigns , who , homeward bound , are wrecked at sea ;
as he who peradventure from croatia
trod ilk on ither 's taes to get the chance
could i submit to make thy word my law ;
then the hobo shunts off down the grade .
and cooed in envy of her gentle needs .
are not here rosebuds , pinks , all flowers
should bloom , after cycles of struggle and scathe ,
and calm and peaceful shall i sleep ,
john answered , there is nothing but the clouds
between the last night and the primal day ,
fert sese campi per caerula laetaque prata
than sacred lore of heaven - lit centuries .
o'er which all ransomed souls must cross .
if that may ever be , one hand we know
is noised wherever knowledge be ;
confused he stops , a length of country pass’d ,
until me sight
now skill'd to soothe , to triumph , to complain ,
and england 's flag waves over ruin'd st john .
at intervals the ocean his tremendous murmur awed ;
effect is of that heaven which thou ingemmest !
a shadow , as she walk'd the lamps among--
and images upon its face there were ,
and were a myle without the towne
the c in c had gone to jail to answer to the charge
sez john c. calhoun , sez he;--
mingled with mighty sighs .
that , like the lark which sunward springs ,
supported in his right :
fallen to earth from midnight far
whilst thou , in darkness , sing'st thy life away ?
who seem two valiant warriors in her sight ,
and may none bind my yellow locks
at the dawning of the morning ,
are not these punish'd , if god 's wrath be on them ?
and exultingly place my plumed cap on his head .
certauere ferae picturataeque uolucres ,
restored the weary ; and the camp was still .
and my eyes through which joy came ,
immortal be her graces ,
the oak and elm have pleasant leaves
and its abounding confluences of being
he 'd look into thy bonnie face
shields , helmets rattle , as the warriors close ;
" halbert , on such a night of a christmas long ago ,
the heavenly words distrust ; yet still they hope
off the very day your paper come . i started it in the
here 's no war - steed 's neigh and champing ,
his feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
leave danube desolate ! afar they roam
and , as weary hours go by ,
before the eyes of philip of france;--
and give my tongue the glory
nusquam inventa quies ; semper quaesita :   quod illi
for i ' m tryin ' to do bes ' i can for you on
yields undiscerned by all but god ?
sweating beneath the spoil of plundered foes .
drugs cravings .   here we see how men advance
for in the same is nought sure nor certayne
a ' his heart he gi'ed to me ;
conversion , i hold , to be earnest and lasting ,
and deduce the lesson from thy life and death ,
o'er the man of war , as marched along
this said , he slaughter'd straight a white - fleec'd sheep ;
is this fair excusing ?
" sir knave , to you . "
living who is so wily as he is ; there is no one can compare with
but then , the joys that lovers steal ,
against a wretch so crook'd and marred .
is the maskinonge grim ,
than himself :
all luminous horizons limited ,
personification of himself .
his glorious godhede his workes doth defende
where they are wo nt , an augre of their fangs .
there , where a few torn shrubs the place disclose ,
a flask of wine , a book of verse -- and thou , etc .
they raised thee not , but rose to thee ,
" knippana , o king of forests ,
while through the window , frosty - starred ,
and all who since , baptiz'd or infidel ,
which sought in all philosophy to find )
sits darkness more profound ;
and decked full fair . and , beauteous to see ,
" how can a fool such mighty prowess show ? "
when they take us up and throw us with the lobsters out to sea ! '
' tis heavenly might that biddeth this . let king latinus feel
they snatch'd her instruments of sound ,
as letters some hand hath invisibly traced ,
and those that enuie thee by scruples letter ,
and burn thee up , as well as i !
our life at home , it matters nothing then
he fought with fists , and feet , and knees ,
the royal priest ; a goblet , and a crown ,
of great limbs gone to chaos ,
now putrid , and the skins mould'ring away .
to wit , wife , children , a friend or two , and a house --
to wait vpon thee home ;
she sits , and rears her head aloft
" since thou wilt not give over , " / the king in answer said ,
draw monarchs chained , and crecy 's glorious field ,
from these jaws , and teeth , and fish - bones ;
to madness and to horror , sure .
to him and to his chiefs alone
their raptures now that wildly flow
' tis truth , holy truth , that , like springs under ground ,
and now the western clouds grow pale
and he called for his pipe
doon - settin ' , settlement , start in life .
around their daughter 's tomb .
each argive bosom beats with fierce delight .
around the centre fixed of destiny ,
his soul brim full of sentiments so loyal ,
  [ compare _ hamlet _ , act ii . sc . 1 , line 292 - -"this most excellent
their track thro ' that grand solitude ,
the young śatrughna too would go
i bow me to the threatening gale :
from storms and calms ,
and through dishonesty or shame
beats for the captive bird of song .
that carried an armour - belt ;
he said you 'd better go to school at night ,
how laxer muscle and weaker nerve
hath laid her babe to rest ;
turns to the perilous wide waste , and stands
the superstitious , idle - headed eld
this was the charm that lucy 's smile bestow'd ;
i hitherto absolve thee .   in return ,
as taut and hoisted high and dry
when , with task completed , given
of the swashing dip of a clipper ship
and the low sun had lengthened ev'ry shade .
shout answers shout;--light sparkles round the oar--
lo -- i will have thee in this place !
“ with mournful coloring : monumental type
that reading , and drove the colour from our faces ;
knowing how ready he would be
' and wait till you see the fight ;
of love , which thee mai availe ,
likewise of precious stones , were all arrayed--
the birds sweet music bore--
and bring you on your way .
to the watchfires and stars that of old
and deep reception , in th ' intender'd heart ;
of the mad pushes of waves upon the land , i them chanting ,
and see the grecians gasping at their feet .
beneath the abbey pavement old
i was mad
and rides to the castle of the king of provyns . ]
and a health to the one away ,
for death , he stands , like baited bull at bay ,
and , lo ! we greet , in glory drest ,
yet is it that , though whiling
it will he showery ;
the labors of a god we recompense .
( like may - flies in and out of flowers . )
" that amulet , thy only safety here . "
by your uccellatojo , which surpassed
look , how i clutch it ,
when one is pure as thou art now ,
the roof is cover'd with the spider 's web:--
thou shouldst lead the bride of beauty
whose offspring , supping where they supt ,
about this time , so runs the story ,
and cleared his throat .
in birth , in acts , in arms alike the rest ,
the night - dew falls chilly my scarlet dress o’er . ”
to the village of the father .
to sail like him and to sink as he did ,
and hard on zephyr 's foot - prints mother flora ,
backwards the ceaseless wind the frigate bore ;
yielding thy blessed fruits for evermore .
an end had put unto his reasoning
let but pink 's face i ' th ' looking - glass be shown ,
to win our love or raise our pride ;
enwheeling , sweep their ampler circuit wide .
the daisy , with its tear of joy ,
description of his idol ,
as i stopped at the mansion of shear,--
for wherever we come , we twain ,
live like a spectre ; or be burnt in flame
sweet slumbering she lay ; and dreamed - steeped still ,
uncouthness .   sed non nobis .
a man to lese so his galle ,
an ' go observin ' matters till they die .
but handy , without more ado ,
service beyond all others of its kind .
her face it is the fairest
such pride he tok in his corage ,
and pleased he leads the dazzled sage to day .
less one arm in a lumber slide ;
he said ; the old king trembled , and obey'd .
and to " magrath " rhymes -- muse despond ! -
playing by mary 's gown .
discarding port and sherry ,
all 's well
little hands clapping and little tongues chattering ,
from which bend down divinities !
the heart that owns thy tyrant sway ,
as mine to her -- as mine to her . "
for their return , and this the vow they paid .
the tempter , but with shew of zeale and love
it is the cause , the cause , my soul ! which sanctifies all this .
beneath the roof - tree 's straw--
each mortal thing does one thing and the same :
sang in this presence kindred themes ;
from him vivasvat sprang : from him
and your bright brown eyes and meek ,
broken his spear , the truncheon still he thrusts ;
blossom on that soft breast , and am again
assail'd on every side , and on the van
that half thy worth ne'er knew ,
the sheep with their little lambs
jamaica 's sweet , romantic vales
they pluckt the seated hills with all thir load ,
" as if i were a peril -- an evil---- "
and let thy tunge no more suche wordes say
--and what within them ? what but in the midst
carbuncles flaming scarlet , amethysts ,
together still shall sleep .
the fire , and lieth lowering and disdainful ,
the lass that weds a warly fool
from a photograph taken with his secretaries ,
_ eve . _           there is pity in thee ,
word more .
to ordered service ; to uproot their vine
the roads of happiness are those
since i first beheld by moonlight
all thou hast would borrow ,
" what though her throne irradiate many a clime ,
yet unto the word he gave i cling ,
white angels had him in their care ,
there thine ideal is ever at thy side ;
that he was going many miles to take
the galli , the emasculate , since thus
' tis best for the heart to hear not the chants
leagued with the valiant anrondica stand
objective forms translated into subjective thoughts ; then we can
in the grave where a briton has laid him .
carried about in the water round the ship , looking like so many
then bending , drew it to the head ,
" give me a fillet , love , " quoth i ,
i 'd sing t ' yer , an ' rock yer off t ' rest .
how should the world be luckier if this house ,
night and day journeys a coffin .
though learned with labour , and though much admired
deep within my breast .
that day and night for his destruction waite .
of medical students -- i fancy you will
nec percandida margarita quaero
now from the hills beyond the niemen echo
who hesitate and falter life away ,
all are but parts of one stupendous whole ;
" why , ma'am , it seems to me i remember _ all _ these grand
the cracking mast , and sees or fears ,
a woman , as his patroness , shall shine ;
let me compose , and duffield sing a psalm . "
vine - leaves , kisses and bay .
obscure , unknown , the shadow of a man
spirit of evil , heavily flying , turning ,
and guard(931 ) and bow he stands in mail
with gold refulgent ; this she bade him tear
be she with that goodness blest
bore toils and dangers , and a weight of woes ;
the lower still i fall , onely supream
naught ! naught ! my power hath wasted on a stone ,
his empty stomach offer'd no oblation :
basses in front of them ,
thymoetes first ( ' t is doubtful whether hir'd ,
but this usurper his encroachment proud
to me in my shieling .
and come , lumbering on thus , to hold him in chase ;
there oft as mild evening weeps over the lea ,
from their perennial wells and sacred trees .
no probable , possible shadow of doubt--
when wearied with the tale thy times disclose ,
tottel 's miscellany
brier , briar .
so shall the noblest truths by thee be taught ;
and happiness too swiftly flies ?
save the wild forest ’s green expanse
or fair because of any mirth ?
well , you may search me if you wish !
played o’er his lips a gracious smile :
waiteth for counsel to direct the bow ,
to the hostess spake as follows :
to fear and suffer by themselves : death moves
whene'er the time may be , among the blest ,
if any , born of kindlier blood ,
the shadows lay along broadway ,
shall our epic strings be strung .
this was a glad hom welcomyng .
or john paul jones before the breeze ,
outroar the lion - throated seas ,
burn , burn away
once with the green again
the leopard lies
the image of my father dear by me all mazed did pass ,
but the whips were flying freely when the field came into view ,
within me , at her name , to pray
caress'd him often -- such a thing might be
with multitudinous walls of wandering wave ;
which splits in twain beneath the ponderous blow ,
will own it equaling the rest .   but now ,
roses and dew ;
ere we have scraped our boots of the mud
at night with the shadow were his alone .
but sitting , now to consciousness restor'd ,
and hills beyond the ohio - flood--
the grape hath closed for ever !
_ medoro _ deep in every rock !
chin resting on hand , and deep -- set eyes--
and the splendid sun - god marching on to crown the world with a
to a green thought in a green shade .
by the tongs , and by the hammer ,
when to thee i have appeal'd ,
in sweate and labour hauing most chiefe comfort ,
with an old white beard and wrinkles
_ lalagen amabo_,--a song may live for ever
of duties , and their narrow bound ,
the barque glides softly into sleep 's domain ;
ulysses ! how the fleet may likeliest ' scape
wound , and spoke piteously , saying , " father jove , are you not
and tongues of prophets speaking in the leaves .
or been sucked in by everlasting night ?
and over the earth "          james thomson
our lips afraid to question , but he knew what we would ask :
on nations fixed in right and truth ,
editions of rapin and tindal , these details are overlooked .
with dusky veils , and boyish heads
following close in his pursuit ,
together came , spectators of the fight ;
that thou hast nerved the afric 's hand
" an ' may they never learn the gaets
holding the scales , that from her hands are dropp'd
to a splendid hall a eunuch led me down a damask floor ,
the harp of tara swells :
the pagan . all the others stand . first spake
kullerwoinen prays as follows :
i had shone forth as a grass - blade ,
and all your ardour , all your hopes are mine .
that helps the widow in her cot ,
said he , " of man that sees the light ?
and tom agrees " where men are keen
and carven tombs where memory weeps no more .
no inconsiderable quota ;
whom i ( o cursed spite ! ) did lay so ! "
or in the green sea mate with monsters strange ,
the hunter longed his prey to kill .
far from father and dear mother
these crown and caress thee and chain ,
under the greenwood lynd ;
both as a man and boy ,
bite away beauty .
vessels . ‘ pharos , ’ or ‘ pharus , ’ the name given to light - houses ,
this country for our fatherland , bestow
than starlight can stay :
and wearily and drearily
ah ! that they might be for him .
their flocks by night "       nahum tate
but i will give you back each kiss ,
a child for his might ,
o how soon the foot may slip ,
the stately fabric shakes and falls away ;
" may the wind assail thy vessel ,
for the sighing of winds in the pine trees
against the crepuscular spirit in
you 'll allow only genius could hit upon either .
a race appear'd before me , on the ground
his work . himself i hardly knew at all ;
first on her lord the wife depends ,
when it comes to the last we 'll want to die --
that sadder day when we beheld the great
the conquerd also , and enslav'd by warr
or change to silence as you stand and hear
life like a precious metal in his fist
not by a flaunted beauty is she guessed
this universal frame began :
for these twaine soules,"--yea , she who did last remain
the dead came from beneath the sea ,
for papa was a grave , respectable dog ,
the brows of margaret and catherine .
and often through my curtains peep ,
fallen is europa ’s brightest pride —
to that anointed head ,
while we whose hearts should with the message thrill
and bent their lowly heads in fear .
give me your own enchanting gal ! "
and do n't know what to do .
schlaf , mein wölfchen , schlaf .
" if snip should be drown'd , " said the valiant o'keef ,
it swells like the roar of the sea ;
was lazarus ; and that would be enough
its tender spell , and joy is uppermost ,
converse with me : my will thou seest ; and i ,
to serve in lady 's bower ?
" o courteous shade of mantua ! thou whose fame
words like bright javelins to fly with fierce
aletes laid his right hand on his heart ,
vain , oh worse than vain , the visions
then she freed her new - made creature ,
and at her light - hearted view of him .
oh , but you see he had n't had enough--
to spend your money , sir , is all a jest ;
she wears ; he , proud as dandy with his stays ,
o'er the heather .
shall ever cease or sleep or reach its goal
thrust his great harp of walrus bone .
and with the ebb of the tide the ships sailed out of the harbor ,
she waggled with her tail ,
is the shelf of a cupboard ;
the sight of these good things to me was unpleasant ,
if what you say he said was true , why has he not done so ?
seated them on skins of bison ,
and smiled upon the silent sea ,
lo ! where it comes like an eternity ,
manalainen journey with thee . "
for a word .
half his present repute for freedom to think ;
through the trailing aureole ?
and then the thought came : " i 'm a failure .   all
over my dark , void spirit , summoning
the net , the fillet , and the woven bands ;
the purple grape , and golden fruitage smile ;
clear along the mountain - crest !
with the counsellors of wisdom -- by their loyal duty led .
over , between painted scenes and real people .
you wo n't have long to spend .
have found them new loves . "
mid - ships with iron keel
she hath sown and she shall reap ;
and ' twixt the coils her hands would pass ,
what is it to the murmuring stream
it ( ah ! ) too late repents me ,
and mother 's , in the fireplace glow.--
' tis finally , the man who , lifted high , 3 .
whose over - hasty impulse drave him
raptured i stand ! for earth ne'er knew to bear
when france shall reign , and laws be all repeal'd !
supreme among the things create
when nothing yet hath damped its high endeavor
matter of import to unfold
i 'm glad of that ! a pact may then be made ,
and swift sun - gleams !
" ond entreaties " was changed to " fond entreaties . "
if thou , fair sítá , wilt be mine . ”
his mother was mameluke breed .
the sparhawks , the penhallows , and the rest ;
opposed to neptune , king of the vast deep ,
from morning until night ;
margery had learned to read .
with mossy trees , and pinnacles of flint ,
with conscious proide
out goon the swerdes as the silver brighte .
in arms with that inexorable fiend ?
on his tomb the birds were feasted
with his yong brother sport , light fluttering
yet it ever remain'd firm on the circular cloth .
of knowledge ? would it ease you of your pain
to catch weak converts ? where your lofty boast
_ gabriel . _ god is more .
on the oxus stream;--but care
it sanctifies the vesper hour
and hears that it is she who joys her love :
dust of the dust that set my lover there ,
and chase the frothy bubbles ,
as the music clash'd in the hall ;
loud crying there , “ o lilith , now arise ,
thou art less than a spark of his fire ,
through that wide forest ; choosing now this way ,
to bharat they returned and spoke :
then quickly she went beyond the temple - gate to a moat some four
though maks the gossips clatter bright ,
to wonder , " do i dare ? " and , " do i dare ? "
' twere vain endeavour to express
a kokila called from a henna - spray :
to argos , ere we prove if jove indeed
in its autumn tint of gold--
i looked again -- his noble form
the loves that love , the wills that will the same .
jekkel , and jessup , and one - eyed jill .
wond'ring what thus could waste them ( for the cause
the caesar an imperial crown ,
to trot you out in a verse ?
il fut par un triste sort
lace farthingale , and gay
and hails the night because he trusts the morn !
undertone .
( whereof a third is from my memory gone )
i outside the home , you within ;
from opening heaven!--dost thou , then , fancy , deign
and this first summer month that brings the rose
the air above his bed began to move ;
seconded the seaman 's blow ,
if the path be stopped by rivers ,
so sadly lost , so lately sought in vain .
herself descended ; there her treasures lay ,
it seems as if ' twere planned above ,
wide o’er the field , resistless as the wind ,
fled ever through the woodwork , till they found
the vapors weep their burden to the ground ,
in such god - silence , the soul 's nest , so long
and didst bring her home with thee in love and in charity ,
her idle freaks from family diffused
thou leavest nothing , for thou wilt not come back .
and your eye and voice grown bold ;
see , now he mounts the shrouds -- as he ascends
what can she have ; what can she bring
again the great archangel stands ; the light
ausonia 's naiäds own'd ; and aid from these
from the triumphant cruelties
then idomeneus vaunted over him saying , " othryoneus , there is no
the biting axe of florence .   farther on ,
are only german lutherans .
was n't eck a wonder ,
deserts , and has a byway of his own :
is no play
these limbs , or i shall draw the vital air .
twa bairnies , twa callans , that skelp o'er the leas ,
is only the more unsparing for its exquisite good manners and
the field marshall declared and his good lady too ,
shall own , he never was from home before !
thus fled in rout confus'd the treach'rous moors
as the pure zone which circles dian 's waist .
and , for the mouthing actor , verse indite .
o'er fruitless field .
my reindeer , even , whom i . . . pray ,
underneath this tablet rest ,
' tis midnight , but small thoughts have i of sleep :
with those we cherish near ,
good to be happy
decreed his singing not too bad
invite your sails to search the eastern world ,
it was all a jest ; - and - yet -
free us from this evil magic ,
a. r. mckee , and w. j. landram ,
" great peace in europe ! order reigns
i fear the red cock — if he crow to - night —
i was born a rover and a passer - by .
ere thy crime be lost for aye ;
each night , how late soe'er , he sought the well - known home .
victorious by this quaint mewing ,
for this with falsehood is my honour stain’d ,
how chance , or hard involving fate ,
and sparkling jests and liquor ,
said he 'd help them an hour ere he 'd keep them adry ;
me quoque nunc similis stimulat furor edere uersu
such gain of her 's assure thee , i deeply shall lament . "
with arduous labour of long years ,
and hell itself will pass away ,
row a boat through viro 's waters ,
are noble , i should hate thee more than love . '
and livy 's pictured page!--but these shall be
sprang apple - amaranths divine .
one gleam of law within the mind of man ,
if from the fortilage they safely fare .
a garland of goldenrod forming her crown ,
hell could no longer hold us in our bounds ,
aeuro ~ now , aeuro(tm ) quod torrent , aeuro ~ i { n}ot , whare ,
the fullest help thy soul hath power to give ,
as shaped by nature in burlesque and sport ;
with but the livid colour of the stone .
beyond the bad , bedevilled woodland streak ,
and yet , the struggle fails ; since light , howe'er it weaves ,
selling off at the opera - house      punch
grinn'd from the port , on every sail his own .
we gaze on the arch whence the ivy descending ,
the holy ghost came from above .
that repose which , at home , they had sighed for in vain ,
and all the world demurred -
to lonely , weary , wand'ring travellers ,
jesu is in my heart , his sacred name
she clos'd the door , she panted , all akin
and on the keys they found his fallen head .
yet christ himself shall soothe the way
suddenly a cocoa ball barely grazed his nose .
no matter what troubles have bothered the day ,
in every kind of place and weather ,
her idleness .   what is she on this earth ?
and strong as is thy grace !
plunged headlong in the new - formed deep ,
when you were tired and went away ,
pr[=e]engag'd to a few sovranly determinate objects ,
of vanished type , steps from the vast
i always cackle for my grain ,
thorn for the camel , fodder for the kine ,
a doublet of the lincoln green--
his fall'n condition is , and to me ow
it is the token of a nation 's tears
where the waters go brawling
and , as an engineer , surveyed
excepting where it 's cold ? '
he flew into a passion , and in fact
of the fancy 's silken leash ;
where many an ancient kingly head
a hafin all de foon dere ish-
with the same burning of the soul we thirst ,
his aged guardians lift their heads and cry ;
our strong - abodes and castles see
and with loud cries the vaulted palace rang .
" god of the golden wand ! on what behest
every shelf its emptiest book ,
in quiet haworth laid .
_ yet stains our land be by this blood wash'd out , _
let it rest ! . . .
an ' take the ' ole mad world as ' arf a joke .
alde answered him : " that word to me is strange .
as the small pebble stirs the peaceful lake ;
we drove afield , and both together heard
to share the larger harmony too much .
she grew in the shade like a young lady - fern ,
evil fate might rise against thee .
she is changing back again to spring 's .
who deem religion frenzy , and the god
and still intent to seek orlando , he
" to whom with grief : ' o swift to be undone !
french , " landes " -- flat , bare marshy tracts in the south of
to serve the hearth , to bring to birth ,
but you deemed me chaste -- me , a tinselled sinner !
with the same colour which , through sun adverse ,
else little joy would be in life ,
and the two foes of man , war and winter , allied
ah me , ah me , that pumpkins are so small !
yet he -- this sage -- who found the world so base ,
he knows how dearly fair renown is bought :
out of all calm ; and the night was coming .
few of his tribe excelled him in the chase .
with his golden mead o'erladen ,
as half in earnest half in joke ;
to me is odious
and she 's away to the elfin court ,
and all the good that to man 's race is given ,
along a rough , a weary road ,
when charlie to the highlands came ,
drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine ,
the love we so desired ;
shall stretch your daring champion in the dust ;
the lifting hills and intersecting forests ,
joy was the heart of juggling jerry !
who can foretell for what high cause
and there , where waves advance and waves recede ,
thy love was far more better than
as you taste it only there
retains its graven fealty to the dead :
but vie with distant darts to sweep the rampart 's height .
nathan the prophet , metropolitan
as girls do , any more : it only may
blessing those around the shrine ,
of dragon - flies alit
she is dead as a log .
that made up for all and a world of clay
the stranger passes by the door--
to each and to all      who have awe in my presence .
singing along
an unmolested empire hold ,
the gentle xaipe of the attic tomb,--
they shall arise in the states ,
then in auspicious hour it stood
and she made answer , knowing well each name ,
from darkness where the cuttles rest ,
the plumy - crested helms and pointed spears ,
the habitation of all pure desire ,
thou tamer of the human breast ,
a herald thou from heaven ’s domain ;
and all among those damsels free and bold
with sneers and stinging taunts disgrace me ,
by the surly salt sou'-west ,
com pensive nun , devout and pure ,
or haply might she make it less ?
and darkening in the dark he strove
o friend ! may each domestic bliss be thine !
cocytus ' lamentable waters spread :
when the ripe grape imbrowns , than was the path ,
spirit of things unseen ,
wash his linen in the river ,
thro ' good report ,
but all was dull and gloomy , sad and cold .
thy voice of music leaves upon my ear .
for night by night some lorn wretch overweary ,
but joys surpassing the sweetest of those
that amos schal to you appiere ,
thy syluer , then his golden stream .
wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes .
and thrilled the breeze .
grief for my son , the brave and true ,
sint homines , spiras , pallam , redimicula promit .
canaan " in eleven books , and the third barlow 's " columbiad . " the
far on ahead , a loose horse taking ,
not only in the cataract and the thunder , 232 .
and the poor donkey 's load was lighten'd full soon . ]
my seal upon the red wax of this blood ,
a trunk without a head walk in like manner
when she fell , her utmost strength exhausted ,
saying , " i vill roam no more to foreign countries
the mississippi to its upper springs .
upon the mournful , glimmering chamber fair .
thick round the dead and dying , where the plain
here 's a strappin ' young inspector--
next under gazel marched they that plough
from the clear moon , the trees , and coming madness .
distress ,
divine the melody , the song divine .
that the ringed mail grow cooler / on us storm - weary men .
there 's a vision , in the guise
sit on these maryland hills , and fix thy reign ,
time was ( my fortunes then were at the best )
but one gaze at the front -- what a horrid old cat !
dever shall we lidger bore ,
or other recreation .
_ an ' noo to face the kirkward mile :
that shall not lie where it doth fall ?
the torment undergo of the first round
how the white mother - muteness pressed
but let your love even with my life decay ;
to philp 's and to the union parlour near ,
self - confidence . ' surely it would be better for me to return
when i thought it was n't loaded ;
_ whusslit _ , whistled .
from sword - clash dread of your danish clan
it is thy voice .   for the last time i hear it ;
even redi , though he chaunted
of days departed long ,
nor a floy ;
from her grave awakes the mother ,
non es ya tiempo de perdones dar ,
released the animals that are on earth
in which their men were cast of old ,
the stars of hyacinth and puts off grief ,
as men account their own .
that ye may see the white - thorn tree
hushed the wounded man his groaning ;
were gazing on the stalls .
has never gladdened fairer ground
from pricking of remembrance , which alone
what dread hand and what dread feet ?
ne noxa corpus inquinet .
art thou then sorry for this long - wished day ,
" ' tis inclosed in yonder casket--
or all the treasures , which the fabled gnomes ,
of my distresse sitħ i can no rede
the forest shall conquer !
scorned me and mine ; and now thy pardon , friend ,
ye hypocrites ! for ye are very like
and i with thee one hour will stay ,
he drew her close ; the moonless skies
his hand suspended , his eyes grown dim ,
and in her act as sensibly impress
to long night of changeless woe
life is the triumph of our mouldering clay ;
god save england , blessed by fate ,
they knew not whither ;
they led him high applauded , and present
frightened with the spear and broadsword ? "
of e'en one of her sons ? oh ! cold , cold must be
mellow and yellow and rounded hangs the moon .
for all that s good is beautifull and faire .
be a groomsman , if you like--
which used to do me credit with many a wicked harlot ,
the railroad , ii : to be characterized as the above , yet totally
this is all the book that i read you ,
dragged the sweet pillage of a summer 's day
where the heart , sick , despondent , tired with all ,
fidem quaeso , exaudi , et faue coeptis meis ;
my neck was like a place of strength
who sits awhile to gaze on thee ,
and kept on drinking .
and often in my solitude i sigh
yea ! _ this _ the love which age again lives o'er ,
and the target , bathed in blood ,
more merit in form than in inspiration and are lacking in
buckles on his mighty scabbard ,
and thunder rolling shook the firmament .
the ring and seal were hers again .
far more troubles weigh upon me ,
what dire events ha'e taken place !
the hares , distracted , scour the grove ,
in missing the hour when great jove wakes .
and upstart fortune fain would be
on this lottery game ,
in allusion to the well - known platonic fancy , that love is the
he cures<45.2 > his cares , his burthen feeles , then streight
" sir stodge is talking greek , you know .
from him , for other light she needed none
when karl in maurienne valley lay ,
for the maiden , many a blossom
estando ausente de ti ,
for those who , under freedom 's wing ,
yet all is still within and desolate .
half ludicrous . "
betraying when , upon the gates of death ,
the firelight shone in window and door
in the abysmal ocean 's luminous levels .
where one who made their dwelling dear ,
who looks unmov'd on misery makes it more .             a.
for the sake of that sire , i reclaim from the grave .
with that he cast himselfe vpon the sword ,
each works its end to move or govern all :
new vigor to her flights , new pinions to her wings .
and gaping sign of headlong falling make :
attend his steps ; the rest their weapons take ,
he was riding a goat .
oh , come , my sun , and let me know
and yet not cold . '
i pace the earth , and drink the air , and feel the sun .
if that 's your game it 's good for _ my _ biz .
and the cheeks of her who bore me .
the waters from the waters ; and god made
the fiddles were playing and playing ,
among immortals when a god gives sign ,
all the dreams my land denied ;
est mihi , quae nunquam est non oculata , fides .
on a hot afternoon
or such the tale they told me ' round the hearths .
" fain with the same i 'd serve thee to th ' height of thy desire ,
sowing the seed of wisdom , guarding the living springs .
poor jane 's last bed unchristian - like was made ;
where the great steel chains swung over the buckets of rock .
how far is st . helena from a fight in paris street ?
that kensna hell !
the victim charger cropped the sod .
with all its waving trees ;
the sorceress from their furious vengeance fled .
on the inside , chaff and tan - bark ! "
may be prospered by thy coming .
the record of a nameless woe
whose holy tie i never could forswear ;
when every street with snares is spread ,
with arrows on their quarters and with numbers on their hoofs ,
and nothing , o rose - leaf woman ,
and thogh the clerk and the clergesse
so out , over the pass , into the plain ,
o'er wandering brooks and springs unseen ,
lived , with his wife , a cottager . they dwelt
where lies the land to which yon ship must go ?
to search the new land what it was , and on what shore he lay
but is sure to be lost on his prodigal heir ;
the lion and king diderik
till even the darkest chambers of grey time ,
the trees were knit together , and the deck
fated to cover both his form and mine .
harbour - bar ,
like a subsiding sea )
themselves the possessions of our lord who is long afar .
share . but the ram for me alone my goodly - greaved company
bent down upon him from some happy place
while angels in their songs rejoice
expressing e'en superior pain ;
and without my fishing - tackle ,
be spiritualiz'd . peona , we shall range
of dreadful length and dazling arms , in guise
" simeon ! " he echoed , mimicking her incredulous tone .
expatiate free o'er all this scene of man ;
all creatures living beneath the sun ,
and on his sight the angel burned .
into all the silly mazes of his mind ,
investigates and re - investigates .
with the spring doves
then the blacksmith , ilmarinen ,
the breeze but the faint rustle of her drapery
and stayed within the hermit grove
she is at rest .
she shall be mine , and i will make
akampan(962 ) is the giant ’s name .
roaring , i saw him like a silver star--
en que no me mirases vil juguete
outvying in your beauty
o then , i felt , then
even sappho 's flame .
the day that i come home ;
or almost all that is , hurting the hurt--
on our right hand new misery i saw ,
and when i sleep i seem to be
fashioned in thine own image , see how fast
why these strangers journey hither ?
were of the finest that e'er flounced in nets ,
" after sunset , at my casement ,
so bear me forth with lightning speed ,
of hardship , skill or courage , joy or fear ;
once more , and once more seem to make resound
and pierced the mighty rustum while he lay
no mist or stain !
good - bye !
she with sharp beak still rends the struggling prey ,
we look along the shining ways ,
you shall quaff the most sparkling of waters ,
o cruel fancy , so to betray me !
and aid him to correct the plains ;
i weave these rambling numbers ,
waves in the eye of heaven her many - colour'd wings .
warwick and stafford leauied at no lesse
for mede kepeth love in house ;
who the dreaded aegis waves .
and then she said : " our unit reached this place
_ that soils my limbs with the dust . _ "
und schätze . was er gegen dich gelobt ,
your highest wishes should let you down !
glad ranks of color stand ,
' twas but fantasy , for my love lay still
what shall give your uncle joy .
i have a friend so precious , 237 .
thou canst bear another 's woe ;
to new appearance .   meeting these , there came ,
an ' now doreen she sez i 've broke me vow ,
was bade to stay and con his books
and determine them to kisses .
swaying the host with silent sound .
wand'ring to love is a heavenly dance .
so brave a palace built , o dwell in it
a tale of fairy ships
of feverish life , should look , for the last time ,
cherry "                      john gay
too closely press the verge .   accurst be thou !
" she said that he was mine ' all day . '
or is't thy piety ? for who can tell
opprobrious , thus , assail'd ulysses ' ear .
thy heart to more disasters than now are ;
through the noon gloam butterflies pass ,
but i digress : of all appeals,--although
grant me , i pray , a single grace .
for to bathe there your pretty breasts at all times :
stint the young germ , the tender blossom stain ;
of other cloud than sin , fair ornament
  91 . = meikle stane= ; huge stone .
death carries off the husk , we keep the ripened wheat ,
go'st thou to market with thy pink and green ?
and went with him as far as ch'u - shan .
and ivory and bright gold ,
ye distant spires ! ye antique towers !
at sike like pleeaces .
or altar smoked ; yet who more oft than he
frets ' gainst his fellow , warring where to send me .
for the commissariat camel an ' ' is commissariat load .
then hye to hell , haste to the furies there ,
the mynde : and sharpynge the wyt in many a thynge
and then we seen him shed his hat an ' reverently kneel ,
o earth 's betrothal , sweet and true ,
as is he who dreaming sees , and after the dream the passion
_ wetherbee . _     yes , all . and it occurs
the cloud - embracing mountain 's son !
chaugham told them of his boyhood ,
behind my message hard i came ,
and so he dede in alle haste ;
vessel without a pilot in loud storm ,
would happen to my penny .
for men , at last , to capture !
you 're telling to a knot of friends
“ but i , whose sire is nereus ; who was born
so may you see the village innocent ,
" it well may irk , " said hagan , " all us good knights of thine ,
oh ! lay the pencil for a moment by ,
you like your fun as well as anyone ;
even thence we made escape by my manfulness , even by my
wi ' sma ' to sell , and less to buy ,
what cheers ascend from horde on ravenous horde !
he gazed about , and then above , and so
discreet as always , while you think . miss fox , his thoughts are
and tranquil as the glacier - snows
" and has he never written line ,
bright vestal flame that , kindled but ev'n now ,
an ' he ai n't by ' isself in dat .
" this from the king!"--phantoms in fog rode off .
" what , grudge me one poor cabbage ! is it so ? "
whate'er may come , i will not , lord , complain ;
ef stripped to self , and stark and bare
mine eye hath had his fill . "   with fixed gaze
i am the empire in the last of its decline ,
as anxious and as oft oneiza 's eye
drew my feet to her willing side .
but where is she?--her eyes are dark ,
on her grand jubilee .
and said , i have been in yonder town ,
roams with his wife in mean attire .
' i s'pose they 've brought the line beyond the knapp ? '
for thou dost love but me . "
august 6 .          ' history of england ' published .
now doll brings the expected pails ,
of the mighty dead ,
" o wae betide my cruel mother ,
of his free bounty , who had made them apt
before the folding circles of the sky
his favour and turn aside from the command he laid upon them .
but both shall back return one day ,
and thou , who gap'st for my estate , draw near ;
till in the veriest
it is her hair
upon a day , when the dog - star
abroad by reinless steeds , even so the world :
waft , waft them , ye zephyrs , to erin 's blue sea ,
wild thyme , and valley - lilies whiter still
they soon reach'd the hut , which seem'd partly in ruin ,
it is not improbable that circe was the original from which the
the lilies lie in my lady 's bower
i did not pass the hours in vain ,
you would not have died and been reviled :
at that day
as i stand and listen
apaciguador del reino ,
be stupid , if you can ,
as i marked his martial step
me soul was withered be a woman 's frown ,
silent is all save the dropping rain ,
but peter , though now damned , was not
annual for me , the grape , the rose renew
. . . down the path--
once of men 's freedom , a freight
while plum - and peach - trees fill the entrance patch .
unsung ; or to describe races and games ,
as from each roof a tower of smoke ascends
they the envious little people ,
may at god 's pleasure work amendment here . "
when the fair morning blush'd with orient red ,
rewarded for thy faithful love .
and in the same suche ay moste besy be
meantime his four brothers and draupadi had undertaken pious
every star .
vilos , y el pecho se inflamó á su vista
there was a man whom i knew well
of the wildwood breceliand 's perfumes
halfe in a swoune she was for fear i weene ;
walked across the plains , loud - playing ,
sensitive like a child's -- drooped a little in recollection of her
and live to bless mankind .
yet every day , while absent thus i roam ,
of her own life .   i hope it was not---- " " oh , no -- no ,
this man and bring him happiness , but with heart
the precious pain of arms that held me fast .
an 's thankfu ' for them yet .
aus rhegium , des gottes voll .
  [ charlotte augusta ( b. january 7 , 1796 ) , only daughter of the
her symbol is not , and this pure world of ours
was ever giant 's dungeon dug so deep ,
with no more sign of reverence than a beard .
sometimes i thought it was a bird
i know not how such things can be
with the tired little moon hangin ' low in the west
from cold apple - pie - crust his lordship _ would _ stuff in
from her , what was the web whereof she did not draw the shuttle
traced thro ' each gay , voluptuous wandering
covered with pearly grain :   yet god hath here
i care not if the train
and with a murderous mind prepare
when he had n't been to school yet -
talking very small ;
say , do i wake?--or are your woes a dream !
look't round , first to the sea , then to the shore .
the frozen vestals bow ,
the carters watched him , the boy hallooed .
if danger , and pain ,
that , not a span below ,
graze after thee , and weep .
its women grow unwomaned , whence there spring
holy the soul that can not taste
in region far from fatherland and home
we , even we , henceforth flaunt out masterful , high up above ,
sad as the wail of some poor castaway
that the north wind never may chill or flout it ,
lost to the light , as birds by myriads hie
oh !   to be a wave
never , except in victory or death . "
ah , no ! the task 's so wonderfully great ,
and height of bliss but height of charity .
though still confused his service unto me ,
the thin moon and the shaken seas delight .
grandfather wore them , buckled and trim ,
and , from their beds the dusky sands upborne
where naked , gaunt , in endless band on band
till even first - class passengers could tell the meanin ' plain !
we all were silent .   ah , obdurate earth !
judge of the nations , spare us yet ,
resplendent with the brightness and purity of love ,
thy wondrous ride , oh tam o'shanter ,
i grew to this without your aid ,
and hear afar on the booming bar
and silent sells a king , or buys a queen .
that called on cotys by her name
as in the round wherein our lives are pent ;
shall they see light fall
steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows ,
for such a supersensual sensual bond
this said , pisander from the car he cast ,
i see them mix'd with george 's sons ,
had scarce more honour'd than accustom'd been,--
round fires soon lit , soon quenched and done ;
these houres , and that which houers o're my end ,
triton , who boasts his high neptunian race ,
befits it rather , think ye not , my hosts ,
against you come , some orient pearls unwept ;
and ears that listened to her strange birds speak .
shall the sun weep for hearts undone
filling the listening heart with piety .
a hunger -- not at first after known good ,
o heavenly father ! " and with quickening steps
to shield your harvests , and defend your fair :
let us servire cantico .
an ' stood beside an ' watched myself
and in the almond - scented vale
yet could not but change color , now waxing white , now red .
which told me that some one was robbing old grim night ,
i 'll have the skids kept clear with nothing round them ;
that wrings its chords , and longs to be at rest ;
increasing evermore until it smites him ,
that turns earth 's smoothness rough ,
those amber halls , those stairs of pearl .
and where it liked her best she sought
the cestus clasping venus ' side ,
with the cheers of our men .
anger then incens’d the mountain - vila ,
breaking coal within the smithy ,
like a bow - string snapped asunder ,
but tho ' he died , his deathless name
but built conspicuous on a swelling knoll
lo , the tall peneian virgin
and then said venus , rising from her seat ,
he could not help the thing which he related :
bright are the blossoms of the scarlet sage ,
thus as they strove , their desperate hand
of power to suffer woe .
" ef we southeners all quit ,
the thought of a shut gate of paradise ,
was scarce enough ; for he had fifty - nine
' _ aquí morirás , traidor ,
now it is , and names its price .
bring us messages of light ;
brother , my brother . "
consult your teacher , and he tells you ' no . " '
thou by thy mistress death hast given to man
upon both sides of the pastures ,
but thither a pilgrim came ,
so do n't go to the village .
the truant gamboll’d farther :
the face of beatrice .   it is not hers ,
they water the stuff he is sewing ,
but i will use my best endeavour ,
our worlds are drawn apart , our spirit 's suns
a wealthier tribute than to thine he gives .
and saw their misery , at the view
_ a roof for when the slow dark hours begin . _
in whose holy mirror , night and day ,
they put us in trousers of scarlet ,
waken , lords and ladies gay , vol . i. , 304 .
i read you poems all the day ;
if die i must , then my last vow shall be ,
and all was white . the pure keen air abroad ,
might me excite to fore and after - grace .
same mind , i for one would rather drink salt water once for all
out on the gnarled old tree ,
full many a six - foot grenadier
and cowslips loved by the nightingale .
there is a flower , the lesser celandine
lay in the offing by south where the towns of the tevas are ,
austin , saint , profane wish of , 409 , _ note _ .
to plant my ladder and to gain the round
here 's the tail firk'd , a piece acted lately with great applause ,
and down to us the rest from round to round .
any woman in plymouth , nay , any woman in england ,
after all , tindal and the censurers of young may be reconcilable .
affection of one who , in nature , united
aneas drew back , his heart by ' his hearing affrighted :
still farther to proceed behoveth me .
bade him into the forest hie .
" we stand above the jarring world ,
and forests murmur , dwellings of the gods .
yet in the outer gloom may only wait ,
each common bush shall syrian roses wear .
and in a moment more
" woman ne'er shall find my bed . "
think’st thou then thyself of higher lineage ?
con las plumas por el suelo .
over hamlets , over halls ,
mothers and wives , if the summons comes ,
to make himself the master of that deep art
what others are to feel , and know myself a man .
and traces , in the simplest heart that beats ,
you 'll be comin ' back , my darlin ' !
to thrust its black eyes through the door or lattice ,
and half of the women around were crying ,
' tis not enough your counsel still be true ;
yet deem'd herself in common pity bound ,
that pallid petal sweet ,
had you one sorrow and she shared it not ?
this lady preith that he may wite ,
if haply , brightening , it may cast
even so the wild - woods of manhattan
( his box is next to ours ) ,
i sailed with the old man to view the shores
into each close and sultry fjord .
there shall be seen the spaniard 's luxury ,
but prayer against his absolute decree
were none of all my father 's sisters left ;
a strange light , and the scene as sudden changed .
spreads the sad foss .   there , on the very edge ,
thou wilt perform the bidding of the lord . "
while from its far celestial throne
but we didn ' care at all .
and catered for it as the cretan bees
with arms of power , and legs of power ,
received each robe and ornament ,
the billows burst in his doorways ,
how you can possibly be
but between them , chin with chin ,
oft too in burrowed holes , if fame be true ,
“ the slender threads from spindle twirling fine ,
this the truth that i shall tell thee :
come , join in the only battle
but gave him a mind that could feed upon care ,
and bring up darts and javelins . mnestheus here ,
" yet stand as you are
' twere well to stir some chearfulness :
april , april ,
petulant imps of light ,
and home to heaven exulting flew .
to the rough year just awake
till the still innermost chamber fronted him .
tear it with your jagged teeth .
whom hast thou loved and lost ?
and call'd to ezekiel , and begg'd for his brief:[j ]
the golden agamede ; not an herb
knots and needles of the fir - tree ,
whilst the kiss of his lips , and touch of his hand ,
i 'm glad he remembers what 's right ,
had not been bribed by love or fear ,
desolate winds that hover in the flaming west ;
and she had made a pipe of straw ,
plies the quick needle till the stars grow pale .
his plot conducting by the rules of art :
but now the birds are flown or dead ;
let me glide along thy rivers ,
soft , and stung softly -- fairer for a fleck .
a pure white spirit oftentimes is seen .
amid my peers reflected in the flood ?
dreamed of the sport since april first
savage was at the same time so touched with the discovery of his
_ namu amida butsu _ , such is fate .
but blush to heare her prayses sung so loud ,
then in my upper story -- hath bacchus domination
wool - bearing flocks , and the horned herds .
and our women with tucked - up sleeves ,
some spear should reach him , to his band retired .
and from wrong be free ,
thou art my life -- i the brook , thou the spring .
death , i say , my heart is bowed
unfit to arm your breast in iron bright ,
y caer , como lágrimas del día ...
we spake not , but our thought was one .
" had i my horse and harness gude ,
being selections from the classical poets of china
oh , there 's none so rare
was opened by the hand of god ;
in fine , one seeks some twig that 's green ,
and bahuputra ’s might divine .
nor shall reproach my mind disgrace
lest thou do mar their dream , and come not nigh
from my cherish'd hope i could not tear me .
bring crimson to your forehead ,
oh , thither let me fly !
for the lamb had ceased its cries
after , at sea a tall ship did appeare ,
to all around me . yes , i 've visited
the trees laughed
he sate , and eat his food in solitude ;
yet shalt thou well believe me , / hath passed full many a day
we twa hae rin about the braes ,
( ll . 320 - 322 ) but the angels who kept their faith with god dwelt
far asunder , on separate coasts , the acadians landed ;
dearer because she makes me ill ,
there may be a place waiting on your head
that makes me , reasonless , to reason thus ?
to cover you with froth .
but when did kindness fail to find
he , complete to make it ,
joined by his brother , the design in show ;
to take fresh heart , and tempt the war 's rough game ,
for when success a lover 's toil attends ,
thrilled by the sense of its stirring life ,
she had changed , much changed , it seemed :
such words he spake , and from aloft he sent down maia 's youth
eternal life is nature 's ardent wish :
which known , let us make
or gazes at the far - off ships .
her bosom happ'd wi ' flowerets gay ;
he makth his demonstracions ;
when , as it was in summer 's pride ,     }
and various cares revolving in his mind :
ai n't always ferocious .   most times they are
life , and no pulse against it strove ,
is a drear destiny .
oh ! say na you maun gang awa ,
to any inconvenience to put 'em :
who for their soul 's perdition are alone to blame .
wid er raker don la bottom o ' la kimebo .
that shoots athwart the heaven ,
then was it sweet , as days flew by , to trace
let the shalot be young .
is being kissed and put to bed .
out fairly and wide . henceforward , arise , aspire
and always were so careful how they used him .
the scarlet blooms , the blossoms white ,
while the west - wind rocks it gently ,
be ye happy , if ye may ,
his ardent friendship , most sincere ,
in the twilight of the past ,
the murmur hushes down , the veil is rent .
come , rake his entrails , whet thy knife again ,
ye babes of my love , that await me afar ! "
" ye lispers , whisperers , singers in storms ,
some of here names hou thei stonde ,
glory and power , lord god omnipotent !
on dreams a narrow flame ,
interposing in the quarrel , got a place in a subsequent edition ,
the great were young as you ,
quiet , i saw four great shades coming to us : they had a semblance
and speedily he made them yield him place ,
tedious alike :   of fellowship i speak
crop the green treasure , uninform'd of love ;
have pass'd for a wild goose .
this record from the past i summon ,
and ' twixt farewells and many a kiss a night and day they wait :
ah , weary , weary days , when every sense
though you keep your maidens in it ,
are but the prophet voices which foretell
since we our search for knowledge have begun ,
of blissful kingdoms and the aureate spheres ;
death ! where is thy dark dominion !
i hope my freedom you ’ll excuse ,
yet not to leave a human chance untried ,
that though my fancy , for a while ,
vapour , and exhalation dusk and moist ,
there was an old woman called nothing - at - all
from th ' earths great altar send up silent praise
and i longed till the daylight came ;
when near its close , requires a strainer .
as stood the pilgrim of the waste before
where lodge the guard , and what intend ye next ?
my poor heart may wither , may waste to its core ,
scheming saturn has vouchsafed me to win glory here and to hem
the stag at eve had drunk his fill ,
qui veluti paddywhack for love conlundit amicos ;
and in the song it mingled .   and the dame
the ancient catenated chain
please ráma , me , each saintly priest ,
foretel events , or in a morning dream._--p . 225 .
years neither time can tarnish , nor death mar ,
to spare some royal folks ' sensations;--
when first ambition struck at regal power ;
for this poor eagle with his batter'd wings .
dreaming day dreams , as she watched
my fire aglow has kindled you
" don john is comely , " and " don john is kind ; "
i know thy flatteries and thy cheating ways ;
a dear - bought token some should find . "
this wrathfull vyce exyle out of his mynde
he sez he ’ll be sure , it dropt in before ,
thank you !   no cravat .
a warrior had arrived some days before ;
and forth she rushes , snorts and neighs aloud :
' gainst fear and grief : but now the incense - cloud
black from the sky rushed down a southern gale
but alas ! recollection at hand
is the thought of his despair .
the strain and purpose of the string ,
as those move easiest who have learned to dance . "
in a stark white sheet .
for i have roamed all countries round ,
whose pious wishes still directed were ,
was this the folk to which von kluck belongs ,
sit smoking and alive .
o compton beloved ! what visions arose ,
where are thy glossy feathers ? where
and your feet they flash and flicker--
swift hornbog , with a thousand trampling the dusty green ,
for the brave who fought and died ,
began heaping his abuse on agamemnon . the achaeans were angry and
my body plunges like a ship .
toil , join , and educate ;
when the rains come they have their holidays .
on dawn - lit hills and horizons girdled with flame
sluic'd from its source .   far murkier was the wave
“ if pangs must be , would god that they were sent
whiles crooning o'er some auld scots sonnet ;
from where like clouds to where like mountains tower
summers of thirst parched round thy homely bower
seven steps together bind the lasting tie :
to mark the lyric we had read --
some for the glories of this world ; and some
her son 's wife
but one who knew them , gazing in their eyes ,
pushings , tearings , pressings , and rubbings ;
with these words she put heart and soul into them all , while
her ruby casements . '
and lines of swarthy nubians bare up his litter
your faithful friend , and loving cousin , roy . "
one dark evening , after sundown ,
with such a deed as _ this _ thou matchest mine ,
and time , grown lover , shall delight
a noise like of a hidden brook
those eyes , forever drooping , give
for hope deferred , ingratitude , disdain !
i quell regret for pleasures past and feign
with calm lips over sweet for scorn ,
look with a core of heart in thought ,
when trudgin ' to his toil .
i am old - fashioned , and i am content
thus scorned by that heathen saracine
in a cave by a stream .
what , ho ! our countrymen in chains !
boldly descended in the midst of day ,
the elf , ' i did n't think . '
one baleful fire surviving still
our house , they say ; and mine , the cat declares
here and there redden'd a pistol shot , flashing
may still your life from day to day
and hatred borne my by the whole people , neither have i
in his rough , white frock coat ,
and none may fathom nor understand
" a poet of the land was he ,
unlucky number this!--
up the sturdy cudgel flies ,
with his might he plunges forward ;
imaginary evils , and involve
thou too must pass -- not perish -- in thy time .
to modern daughters of the nile .
which lich was of condicioun ,
with the storm delighteth :
perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
with eye and cry of love illimited
but , in another part , th ' arcadian horse
preserves them in their living death :
the land that shall be .
let me still feed my glance upon thine eyes .
i 'll pore on with pleasure -- deep , lonely , yet dear .
meadow , till with joyful eyes they saw the flower - crowned walls
thundering on upon his journey ,
lamia beheld him coming , near , more near--
and all those goodly statues shall be brent
does all their talk engross !
lily snow - white :
if you want a field of labor
where graves and ruins are spread ;
begun and died upon the gentle wind .
yet he to arms , and war , and blood inclined ,
forever float that standard sheet !
of this our day .
and pealing far amid the vastness ,
and my mother - in - law for ever ,
and eventually he achieved it--
and , like the phantom of some tune ,
impossible , but our authoress sometimes has a soul above
eve , thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
and me in daṇḍak forest place ,
large and characteristic choice is still possible among her
beneath a battered gingham ;
in the hardest years of battle .
now am i afraid to touch
proud o ' the height o ' some bit half - lang tree :
there 's work enough to do -- there 's always that ;
green - yellow , bursts from the copse the laughing yaffle ;
the swarthy faces that too long had missed
haunted by that fell beast , never at peace ,
o simon , hearken , learn the great truth well ,
where she in wrath was stopping .
and seek thy presence more .
as , after stumbling , jades will mend their pace .
but for my faith is true and sure i ween ,
out of my sight !
that mocks the awful declaration there .
with speed debarking land the naval stores :
a mien so sad and strange .
the stuttering quagmire prattles .
with thy mantle of green , richly spangled in splendour ,
other persons , but i have no strict warrant for dragging her name
set in green wood and smiling field ,
( what time the morn mysterious visions brings ,
give grace and glory to the nereid queen .
save that by fits an heifer lows :
gazing round about like him who of new things makes essay . on all
the occasion , if our chief confederate fails ?
all the sweet windings of apollo 's shell ;
for she was lovely that smiled on his sighs ,
and drive the flying deer .
saying , " when shall it be that i see thee again ? " " i know not , " i
their powers neglected , and no victim slain ,
as one , who till arriv'd , weets not his coming .
early aged , and often cold , --
one moment , what it is to love .
and though the apple boughs are bare
for piteous lamenting and sighing ,
appreciation ; and come to it i did .
led to the confines of the sepulchre ,
ah , no!--for in maine i will find thee
who cam so far to me .
and after that endure infernall punysshement
these words scarce waken'd heaven , when -- lo!--our vows
it would not do -- the pillow glowed ,
their works they do for to be seen of men .
her beauty charms the sicht o ' men ;
" mi worthi lusti ladi dere ,
the tyrant 's plea , excused his devilish deeds .
i came to ask a favor -- but i grieve . "--
the weapons that he made ,
_ glamrie _ , the power of enchantment .
and pause ; and know thy boasted honours vain .
please god , if you can make it so ,
where straggling moonbeams cleft a dome ,
is usually very gay ;
no war , or battle 's sound
my bed is like a little boat ;
brow , brow , brinkie ,
two boons to queen kaikeyí gave .
" rank flower of love , for troy . "
and mondamin paused to listen .
wherefore , mine eyes , thy silver mists ?
and the skies , he stopped me , saying :
an ' she want ' i m mighty bad .
to the master of all music ,
are as decrees immutable ; o pause
piping , as he passes
to nebuchadnezzar and all his stuff'd lions ,
the straying fool ' twill plainly kill
now kiss , and think that there are really those ,
the search in the new
had vague ambitions , analyzed perhaps ,
to them the sun 's warm beams were shafts of fire ,
listen to my wondrous singing ! "
next valiant diomed axylus slew ,
where is poor jesus gone ?
and every mountain - road that clambered them ,
yet in my memory from afar
lord , thunder us up to de plowin'-match ,
not to incur ; but soon his clear aspect
to lead your way across
than to interpret , by the letter ,
" o sohrab , thou indeed art such a son
into a russian couplet rather dull
to help the innocents shall be their care .
my years are nearly done ,
with something other than itself ; to beat
that the tenth is always a _ protestant _ sheaf;--
and he slept that night like an innocent man ;
died beneath her weight of sorrow .
that 's the way she rolls her r 's . am i like her ?
that from worldly pleasour and voluptuosyte
the blooms of marigold and spotted adder 's tongue .
though having seen all beauties of our time ,
that all his weir - men should convene ;
and though to scare the ribald from her way
in hell should be thy punishment ,
now , it seems , are opening o'er us .
and feed once more , till sunset , when cool eve
then , only then , can heaven decree ,
terrific , vast , of matchless might ,
the hills of heaven with wasting feet .
predestined scourge of guilty earth .
close by the regal chair
on this side time .
but i dare not let them know it now .
spring with the lark , most comely bride , and meet , ii . 16 .
th ' unblushing bar - maid of a country inn ,
she would not yeeld , but summons all her force
scares bats in space and wings for domes .
nor shouts o ' war that 's heard afar--
but when her moods are ended ,
a whirlwind sprung , and at her foremost side
deserted is the half - mown plain ,
and then and then came spring , and rose - in - hand
my heart no sorrow and no joy has known
sound understanding , judgment true ,
men tell us that the stars it knows are leaving
glory by killing him . when he has fallen we need not be uneasy
so coroner merival sent process forth
life 's sweet wages are in waiting !
you extend your various arts to make so scandalous a property of
i told you before ' t was a stormy night
or other men 's wives have ta'en ? "
although the spring be fair in joyous guard ,
non ego diuitias patrum fructusque requiro ,
the maiden cursed her raven eyes ,
till the whole sunrise , not to be suppressed ,
be blent with laughter .
of hospitality , for i had abundance of everything . moreover , i
euerlastynge lyfe , and endles ioy obtayne
when prague shall mourn her desolated realm .
silent performance maketh best return . "
and knees could still carry them poured pell - mell into the town .
maketh earthly crowns look dim .
departs and leaves her barren ? now too late
the advancing flames , and vainly long for flight .
an ' ye sall be my dearie .
geheime wollust schwelgt i m schmerz ,
who watch'd an hour to work her impious will ,
the which the ant did taste , not eat ;
with courage your armor , and hope for a sword ,
poems are made by fools like me ,
moonshine an ' snow on field an ' hill ,
that he with wrong blame on him leide
took merlin 's hand and led him like a child
" my brother , we are each one citizens
high you lift your heads , o trees ,
when frozen in a hole a pair i saw ;
yet is not grown a whit the fairer .
quick arose before his coming ,
long faces i hate ;
her path of light , though fairer far it winds ,
nor yet our talk by journeying .   still we spake ,
or so we thought , a good clear way
millicent said " strength and the admiration of strength is his
where god resides , and ere midday arrived
my peggy sings sae saftly
believed that eye so clear is turned by any creature .
good precepts we must firmly hold ,
advance and retreat ,
unequal numbers please the gods.--my charms ,
her strength is frail . up now , wise eurycleia , and wash
and i am the stag with the golden horn
earth 's easter answer came ,
come back , cruel ship , and take monia too !
if thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining ,
as if here were those cooler shades of love .
sweet records , promises as sweet ;
but i will die ere i the child forsake ,
therefore for the last time , o balder , hail ! "
smelling of warmth and of her breast 's perfume ,
nor private grief nor malice holds my pen ;
genius shall read its secret ere it flies ;
murder - cry : ho huzzah !
bid the great hear , and pitying , heal my woes . "
where shall ulysses shun , or how sustain
how faith is kept , and truth revered ,
write only to speak of the awful visitation of providence
and they have heard ,
' say , is he still sincere
as soul,--yea , which it profanation were
like a nightmare i will rest
from right to left , to halt
like the last smile of parting day ,
the furies ' strains resound through air
and ek in othre thinges mo
an ' that no one would have missed you if you never had been born ;
to see thee has taken so many steps . for grace do us the grace
in thy tenement high ,
as , wrapped in hazy waves of shimmering light ,
and lowly stooping where the leaf - dammed rills
had been translated once or twice before into english , yet was
viendo que sus ojos
a true believer , and like me
i count her as much as a crack o ' my thumb ,
oh ! the cruelty , the cruelty of my mother - in - law!--
“ close - hidden , i the form of pallas brought ,
dear friend , lift my veil lightly now ; for this is the night of
for the coach comes no more over cherry - tree hill .
like one that stops , and drinks , and turns , and goes
and waded shoe deep through a mill pond of mud !
that , which digested rightly after turns
in region ' neath supernal skies .
then , sighing , turned about , and homeward bent
thy voice along the cloister whispers , " peace ! "
and thou hast risen with the spring !
from danaan fury , all outworn
devotion touch the holy sacrifice .
not to perturb the water or the air ,
of tyrian purple , stand along the quay ;
thus i , whereto the spirit answering spake :
or roses , being withered ;
' though it break my heart to hear , say again the bitter words . '
but when astonishment his tongue releas'd ,
queen and huntress , chaste and fair
carried her lanthorn so
on the mossed elm ; three on the naked lime
on this at last conclude .   the church of rome ,
passive he went in his great sorrowing ;
for hot , cold , moist , and dry , four champions fierce
clear in the deepness , translucent and shining ,
not noah 's flood could make his trumpery swim .
with the partners of their wrong , or with strange souls
she was a breath of forest - wild perfume
extinguish'd , not decay'd ;
and that to which the savio wanders nigh
the proof of grand antiquity . "
called " dieresis " ) at the will of the poet : _ glo|rio|so _
sweet thames ! run softly , till i end my song .
if faithful is thy wife , thou shalt drink clean .
“ could i inform you : equal both in force .
but something told me past escape
from the fair nest of leda tore me forth ,
o sweet incendiary ! shew here thy art ,
withering flower , a text of scripture -- have supplied him with
a complete dictionary of the english and german languages
and obtained the appellation of " the good " and , as the poet says
what need of spring for me ?
how cruel was the murder , shalt thou hear ,
who is he ?
happy hearts and happy faces ,
following works were composed with a view to the press . to amuse
hath aught like thee in truth or fancy seemed :
with stars for silvery pebbles strown ,
neighbor . follow me , and i will lead thee thither . but on the way
the limits of his german shores .   the realm ,
animal , get hence !
oh ! weel ye guess when morning daws ,
who died to redeem us his own .
if you would paint for me that amber fold .
the trading - knight with rants his speech begins ,
that , let him hope his wish shall soon attain . "
duke naimes says : " his wrath is great indeed . "
the patients ' necessary doses ,
of whom he knoweth nought
but his very first position ther was an explosion in the mine .
' menelaus , son of atreus , fosterling of zeus , leader of the
tresses long , the tint of lilac and orange ;
from that strange year in boyhood when he heard
deep in the dark i hear the feet of god :
there was an old person of cannes ,
day by day his heart within him
we have little care of prison fare ,
and what further could we wiss?--
aspicit astantem projecti corporis umbram ,
" let me drink water ere i die ,
your christ , with righteous anger ,
dead as that frozen chaos of the moon ,
if i turn back each leaflet of my heart ,
run riot all around him ,
take her , the thrall is yours .
refuse it not ; but let my body have
that ever left the sky on the deep soul to beam .
wild flapped their wings , as if in doom ,
the glorious host of light
thy brow while thou dwellest here , until that grim disease , which
to him that spied her top - sails first a prize
come , let us go ; though withal a voice whisper , ' the world
what remained of fragments scattered ,
that dear fountain , that old cross ,
the fient a pride -- nae pride had he ;
flit over the brain , like the ghosts of the dead :
ha . that was wrong of you . you have n't been moping ?
if he fail to defend the maid ,
to their dear homes , where sweetest comforts blending ,
when a person 's wet through ,
and saw before and underneath my feet
he 'd hear some news would dea him good ,
blow your breath at the sky ! is its purity slurred ?
through valleys deep - engulph'd , by roaring streams .
farewell , my pastures , my paternal stock ,
" there is hawthorne , with genius so shrinking and rare
since the place wherein ye lie ,
and you lie dreaming on ;
o gallowa ' braes , & c.
with gazing on a woman 's face .
but from the men of gunther with loss and anguish flee ?
i can not echo the old wish to die at morn , as darkness strays !
said he , " yes , i did it then ,
a god with mortal weapons to pursue ?
and open fields , and we not see't ?
and madly bill clutches his brown bow - legs ,
cried on their dreadful fates .
like a dream of empire ; love and scorn
their walls are compacted of heavy stones ,
stir and sing in every bush ;
invade the trojans , and commence the war .
for when þe wat{er } of þe welkyn w{i}t{h } þe worlde mette ,
( whose articles are like the ' thirty - nine , '
still lives on in daily gossip .
" yes , " she said , eagerly .
set moving by an abject blood , that waked
mandolina staring sat ,
where once affection reigned supreme ,
the sweep , o heart , of love 's account   . . . . . . .
no baneful slaughter , hastened on the doom
around the bonnie milky way . "
less prosperously the second suit obtained
rang forth of merry dingles round the tors ;
you , you alone could hold my fancy ever !
a litter , men to bear their lord ;
the lightning of a smile ! "   on either part
like billows o'er the asian monarch 's chain ;
then still abiding in that ensign rang'd ,
as any there is that fits .   i see myself
or to spots where , for those who know ,
and i 'd buy everything that they wish for , by jing !
a furtive playmate of the boy , with stress
with heart moved towards him in wondering pity ,
to gawaine , who had thought himself alone ,
and i am not the king of sleep . so then ,
of the great ball of fire that glares above ,
but just as you 'd think he could n't lose ,
save for the low , soft kiss of spray ,
their portals frame no guiding star
and has a nature so malign and ruthless ,
and ease the panting breathlessness of age .
from hill to hill it seems to pass ,
whan pallas schop recoverir
he stirred , shifting his body ; then the pain
of gold glistrende spoke and whiel
“ to this new seat . quick through the city flies
' tis my positive plan
character ; for if it remains with me it must live and die in
but the hand of merciless to - morrow
a poet 's prayer
their stations in the far ethereal wild ,
nor swept string like terpander , no -- nor carved
like a gesture seen for an instant and then lost forever .
y pródiga del alma , nación fuerte ,
flow gently , sweet afton , among thy green braes ,
to the endless bridge of osmo ,
in the selfsame tune ,
or , if no power of love to bless
samp'sa .    a synonym of pellerwoinen .
rung , a cudgel .
learnt dancing and the globes ;
the dead so soon grow cold .
no bounty did his thoughts prepare
how i would pelt her cheeks with showers ;
above the pap , ætolian thoas pierced ,
or prisoned in the depths of hell ,
i will no longer strive to ope
not less shall manly deed and word
there was an old person of bar ,
" what does that child bring you ? "
sounded the welkin with happy new year !
the houlet flits amang thy ha 's ,
the vandals glorying in their might of yore
what hands have wrought these wonders in the waste ?
and on it this epitaph appear'd:--
by grassy lane and sunny stream ,
though last created , that for him i spare
with the daughter of the hostess ,
hearing oblivion beyond memory ;
what honest man should dare ( he said ) he durst .
time to do so . now , however , that we have at last come together ,
o ! art thou not ashamed
our plans may be disjointed ,
" thee the deliverer , surely thou art he !
the warld an ' its glories are toom ;
this is lemminkainen 's answer :
and louis eats his _ salmi _ daily ;
titian turned again to the painter : " farewell , pordenone !
go , therefore , and thy conquering spear uplift
the uplands will not let it stay
no ! no ! on former favors , on ancient bonds i think .
rustle of dull grasses ,
a merry song the whole day long
or basking in the shine .
' evil only comes from evil ,
must digby 's royal pupil walk the streets ,
thou waitest late and com'st alone ,
while the sun brightly sets o'er yon westermost hill ,
exalted in some way . and if fatigue ,
i ha ' seen him drive a hundred men
life , all of it , my sea , and all men 's streams
putting on their robe of green ,
rich sails their ships do carry , / whiter than snow they are . "
cooling the fever with pity 's balm
do lowlier appear ;
all other hearts i knew .
give not thy soul up sacrificed .
with a kiss and a tear on thy drooping brow .
and thus ayodhyá ’s lord addressed
the inmost workings of the soul
the city of jerusalem to sway ,
and then , descending lower in his search ,
_ routh _ , abundance .
" why pines my heart so wearily ,
a terror in the sunshine , seen afar ,
their sleigh - bells ringing clear ,
life for them shall wave a wand :
a broomstick o ' the witch of endor ,
blood of ages , stop thy coursing
till brahmá ’s favour was assured ,
of that cite , as men mai hiere :
grind them in the very dust ; they see , alas ! they see
upon the shore ; but night - long their ship lay
of lynxes , leopards , wolves ; feeble and slight
saw her come , when all was still .   no lock
fight , oft as ye are able -- sword with sword ,
and little reck i of the censure sharp
like heavenly hope she crown'd the sea
quinis diebus octies labentibus
and there are lines upon his face
--ah ! no , no ! but i write , with the wretched bravado of distance ,
thy message , which might else in telling wound ,
( or rather peoples)--go on without pause !
then says rollant : " great prowess in that thrust . "
such nets had learned to frame ,
_ fisherman _ [ _ nodding _ ] . and above it cross on cross .
with admiration and deep muse , to hear
so dey sho gwine stay
and then it hides itself again .
and a thousand fragrant posies ,
then sunk the star of solyma--
and sche with goodly chiere hire arm
there came to me a leach , that would apply
to sing imaginary pain ,
you had with your john gloyd about his wages .
driven from sicily i have arrived ,
past isles unnumbered ,
let him never desire the thing to see
let others in the field their arms employ ,
yea , all from hell -- keen heron , fresh green weeds ,
and if rollant was forfeited to guenes
tam pulchras variare vices cum fronte puelli ,
can not so tell that it could be imagined ;
an higher state than you pursue ;
like an avenging spirit i 'll follow thee
i also low shall fall , soon as he comes ,
and as ' twas supper - time and more ,
and incandescent light
and slowly pacing round the grave , they sang :
with diseases new and nameless ;
flush the pale cheek , and goad the tender heart .
where shall the watchful sun ,
and with strong , heavy thrust of his knee ,
" and thou shalt perish by a beardless boy :
his sleepless candle and laborious pen . _
acopoeia , and thus , from pure malice prepense ,
from my aching heart she stole .
bones of wolverine for door - sills ,
the horrors which i mention ,
oh when most self - exalted most alone ,
the boundary of th ' eternal year ;
seapoys by the river side
and thus within himself , indignant , spake .
here beds are seen adorned with silk and gold ;
en kin see what am bes ' ;
when bloedel 's men their master saw dead upon the floor ,
unsought the war ye longed for meets you now :
and felt the damp of the river fog ,
who , in obeying christ , offended man !
the fog forms and shifts ;
bot er the werre were achieved ,
swept solemnly down aisle and nave
with food , and cloaths , and sandals for thy feet .
at noon , or where down odorous dales twilit ,
" very pleasant is your dwelling ,
" each matin bell , " the baron saith ,
if you 'd stay with living men .
and wishes , vain as mine , may be
of ganges ; all that or by caurus ( 5 ) borne
arachne , once the fear oth ' maid<82.1 >
or tempt them to an hour of sabbath breach .
and be the means to make her wrong so sore
and where the blooming clover shed its fragrance all around ,
now you could sleep on silver beds--
now had the sun to that horizon reach'd ,
" is it true , " asked a lady aggressively fat ,
they do their bit and do it well .
and toward the road he looked in vain .
she kindled , bright and steady as the star
the broach that was on her napkin ,
' twad meade a nun fra t ' convent run
roribus et flamma lucos adolete sabaeos ;
like a bird that seeketh its mother 's nest ;
bot of the duck was other wise :
and i drifted over the sea alone .
while the river of parting whispered ,
more thick than rain he showers his rays .
do what you list , the term of all your life ,
to house , and feed by hand my weaning lambs ,
and the veil of rain on the down ;
the banjo at twilight , the burial ere morn--
“ lorde , loued he worþe , ” q{uod } loth , “ vpon erþe !
flock round when the harvest 's in play ,
or anything but meek ,
underneath since the charioteer
instrument is that ?
followed , of course , the regular italian structure , but used
as at a throw the nervous arm could fling ,
rash mortal , and slanderous poet , thy name
con blasones de castilla ,
bot if thi lif schal ben honeste ,
here they lie who once learned here
will be thought to have shared as little as any in the defects
as much in drinking as the thirst is great ,
the brooks and breezes to each other
can never achieve perfection :
many still bend their beauteous heads unblest
he bought a crooked cat , which caught a crooked mouse ,
amidst their radiant orbs be found ?
black russell is na ' sparin ' :
who lived on earth but served it not .
" bathe now in the stream before you ,
that round us hung seem gone ;
so that in due time is bore
jack 's goose and her gander
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee . "--1 kings ,
" meantime from flaming troy we cut the way
the ryall bruch of aberdene .
a dreary labyrinth may thread ,
i may escape ) to lead me , where thou saidst ,
now you can do as you will ,
speak like a dame of low degree
the immortal one celestial .   now his heart
of potent fragrance , nor narcissus fair ,
te peto , te colo , te flagro , te volo , canto , saluto .
views him in all ; ascribes to the grand cause
and would cut the fish to pieces ,
thus with fair sleight he laid the knight abord :
all that gay beauty from her bondsmen claims :
in dreams she grows not older
a year , a year , and then to miss
and light besought a lamp unto its way ,
_ five - stress anapestic . _
to float o'er life 's highway .
then ' ere 's to the lodge o ' the widow ,
thy brow ere we twa pairt .
“ fiends of the wood , who wear at will
won by his prayers , he takes the time o ' the day ;
and to the tree of life you 'll have a right .
" straight to the high priest 's house we hurried on ,
that darkly huge did intervene ,
impure , why is byzantium , with the best
resolve and re - resolve , and still
if there be none , never mind it .
cathedrals did craftsmen raise ,
to find laid in the inmost treasury
and ever a phantom before him fled
to warm my breast when thou , my pulse , art gone .
roland blew not so terrible a blast .
all importunity to quit my ships
the sheep are huddling close upon the wold ,
" he not so much rejoiced that he in height
that hadst thou sprung
to give thee all thou wilt . " " beware !
comes the speech , and wonder .
is spotless , and holy , and gentle , and bright ;
to bottomless perdition ; there to dwell
when thus ripe lies are to perfection sprung ,
when in my arms , wi ' a ' thy charms ,
but if not this , some differing thing he be ,
thus in the winds on flitting leaves was lost
auditur usquam : non protervis insonant
on grim grey houses , and on leaden skies ,
no matter how the chances are ,
he felt , from _ soleing wellingtons _ ,
thus saith the lord to his own:--
and from the resurrection of the rump that is dead and gone ;
who never did him any harm ,
and shreds of silver seas ,
i but in vain that saint adore
men whose names are as the legions ,
of elenor murray 's visit , of the morning
thou great high - priest to heaven 's king
or shadows from the shades of awful dis--
close , close , with not a tear between--
there ’s mony a woman i knaw weel ,
" now pass thee on : sev'n times the tired sun
they sip the scandal - potion pretty ;
the living record of your memory .
at the far recollection of this lay ,
as well as he was able while he ate ,
crop close and pass him by ,
and lost in lakes the neighbouring pasture lies .
that all was still , and every look was turned
she touch upon that theme . "   the moon , well nigh
a blazing torch , and so by guile he trapped
down the dim stairs , through the creaking door ,
nec ualuit lotos coeptos auertere cursus ,
pour'd forth his blood beneath the assassin 's knife ,
pool all their terms , then choose whate’er they please .
adds fuel to her lover 's fires ;
ni olor suave de diversas flores ,
dost thou show thyself . fool ! why indeed dost thou contrive
bids the chords vibrate , and therein the song
o'er the features of the dying ,
some village hampden , that with dauntless breast
the maples never knew
“ what are to me my visions ? weight have dreams ?
only the larger stars were waking yet .
but paint a fire , it will not therefore burn .
" the passengers must have thought you mad . "
and my eyes are too tired for the tear - drops to start ,
thy birth was in the forest shades ;
discover'd various cities , and the mind
tak ' time to yoursel ' and thank the lord
inspiration the present investigation has been carried on .
such anguished dreams in your eyes !
then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes ,
amazed -- he knew his carduel 's comely lord ,
call to him , cry to him ,
blow , thou wind of the shadows ,
_ there 's loathsomeness e'en in the sweets of love _ .
while she lived ; there are scores of good women to - day ,
and so small ,
and ever and anon rang out
the funny conscious people
shaking the noonday sunshine
he who , from zone to zone ,
jack ellis and i have tramped long ways
it 's daddies that are the best ,
trod in the wine - press of her feet ,
for a story sweeter still
and paint the flesh to hide the scar .
gang about his biziness !
" i may not wear my sword and spurs ,
and therefore art thou worthy of the boon
closer i creep . . . i crouch . . . i spring . . . .
it is but a spurt at the most ;
islands , and inlets , and they call themselves suomilainen ,
with age 's hoary honours clad ,
where hearts ne'er were sair !
and shrill clamour arose in the camp ,
and quell the deeps with all their throng .
that one small boy
so you , too high for storm or strife ,
nor yet to amuse , as ours are !
these fancies to the wind . remember , pray ,
who ride with augustus , wherever he goes ,
you said you would be wretched where you could not see the bay ,
and the sad shepherd weep for her in vain .
her eldest daughter stood there alone —
good seed of hercules , give ear and deign ,
cymbals and drums resound ; we see and we hear , too , the marble .
and less polite when walking with
sees me , and calls me still , and waits for me !
these dire afflictions shake my changeful throne ,
and call this ardor , so supernal ,
and his eyes like flame that sparkled ,
and faint , worn , bleeding , hailed at last
" rememberest thou aught of thy father 's speech ? "
since was no fear that coud her heart o'erwhelm ;
as thou , aslant with trim tackle and shrouding ,
but go ! thy flight no longer i detain-
wear not , lovely maid , for others ,
when the soundless earth is muffled ,
i winna venture't in my rhymes .
they fetch'd a web o ' the silken claith ,
a bright piece of gold , your baby to kiss . "
a waif by the wayside , unhoused in the night ? "
for all our good is in that primal good
and dead blood is a sweet syrup for you .
farewell , your streets full of adventures .
melt into stars for the land 's desire !
forth from kishkindhá let us go . ”
nondum bis - senos superans . sed et actio quaenam ?
it is a song the oriole sings--
as is _ yours _ , with respects ,
within the gates , proud sinon throws about
canto ii . sugríva ’s alarm .
i nevermore will blow .
what i read ,
the pisces ' light , that in his escort came .
held in thy mother 's arms above life 's dark and troubled wave ,
heaven grant me , too , so swift a pair of heels--
and speak when he is spoken to ,
the shark and the roach dart forward
bind - weeds soft , mosses cold .
the water drained , and then with matches damp
lips of immortal rose , where love and youth
kiss you turn and turn about ,
of jests and gibes ; and , so there be no lack
and he pondered and reflected ,
study too ,
and lairs a tend'rer deer , o ;
thus spake from her chariot the fairy so fair :
that he would fare to hunland , / bade he unto gunther tell .
from the kingdom of tuoni ,
round his waist a belt of copper ,
men once were surnamed for their shape or estate
breathed to my sad lute ' mid the lonely air .
freshness to feel the eternities around it ,
if thou canst get but thither ,
in remembrance of thee .
breaking the shafts of all their burnished spears .
do n't let the spital pass to strangers .   squire
with nothing else to do .
ye screen the ouzel 's nest ;
their engine to the walls they could not bring ,
and loved a timely joke ;
and so was al the werre cessed
and washing absã¡l 's image from his breast ,
dear auntie will come with < i > puja</i>-presents and will ask ,
hath sought to bruise the brain , the sensitive will ,
shall view us as victors , or view us no more !
know'st thou not that busy slander
their joints they supple with dissolving oil ,
say , would you have thought it wrong ?
through the barred windows of the western sky ,
' foolish bride , thou art ungrateful ,
he is come ! he is come ! do ye not behold
o foolish wrath ! who so dost goad us on
this later apple offered you .
be then , the effect excused in favour of the cause !
how papa 's dear eyes did glisten !
they boiled molasses in a kettle over a fire in the big kitchen
quenched youth , and is that thy purse ?
duty and task go by -- that shall be sin !
from whose affection men should shrink as loath
when that is learned , then all is learned ;
here seine , how fair when glist'ning to the moon !
juan , as an inveterate patrician ,
the hollow ships , long their familiar home .
day 's chariot - wheels upon th ' horizon glow ,
in vain he thus attempts her mind to move
heigh - ho , little man , if you meet the storms ,
shadowings of general language . the first prophecy is the fate of
so fair a creature make .
prefer a spouse whose age is short of thirty .
an ' stain them wi ' the saut , saut tear ;
hear me ! i cross with thee the seas .
thinking if she were dead ,
the prince , and level lays her spear renowned ;
with fearless heart and constant breast he flies ;
oh , keep us , dear lord ,
like shipwrecked bodies : seals , unwonted there ,
saying i shall one day leave him
may , if you please , from hence retire ,
pricked for her lees the veins of wasted france ;
he thrust him from his hold .
with gath'ring force the quick'ning flames advance ;
of this your troop . "--"but i request , "
and i 've been on my uppers -- so meagre my sole
pervaded by love , joy , and beauty -- the proper theatre of man 's
thrown , for voicing heaven too well ?
the moisture first , then air thereafter heat--
and can with blindness thy pursuers smite .
it was a cove , a huge recess ,
have other fyve : and overmo
jove indomitable hercules ; and megara who was daughter to great
o steer her up and haud her gaun
i said " you 'll visit here no more ,
that king is neuter ; so for his , use its .
_ year _ , is used both for singular and plural , years .
in a city where ' tis always day
often said to chibiabos ,
and all men kill the thing they love ,
her numerous maidens found within , she raised
won with much labour , the which my gift from the sons of achaia .
fail'd them , the herds harm'd not , through fear to die .
after noise , tranquillity .
fair - haired damsel of the household ,
such military toys ;
the tufted crow - toe , and pale jessamine ,
“ if i again view him , with flesh and hair dight ,
that measured five cubits between hoof and horn .
" o saintly sister mine !   thy prayer devout
yet help ne'er fails us in our time of need ,
surely can they never find better time to fight .
and wet with all the showers ,
still more amusing would it be
nor talked of ties like that , or wedlock 's sacred flame .
nec sero dominam venientem in vota , nec aurum ,
and looks , she sits in simple smiles ,
guarded by the brute violence , which i
to a stone beside the torrent .
am of the fays , and live their changeless life ,
and other wealthy towns , not far aloof .
then future ages with delight shall see
just like daisies all spread ,
from an approaching gale .
but she already knows another youth ,
a lay brother ; his companion
of hamath was a warning of the lord .
i 'll kiss my maiden fair and fine ,
she stops -- she listens--_can _ it be ?
i mean nine thousan ' dolls . per ann . ,
oft i 've met her in the glade ,
what time i looked up into the blue dome ,
" fair pound , we can never live together ?
a woman 's hand!--there is no better thing
he with his pole - axe , practiseth the fight ,
look therefore if thou canst advance my bliss ;
unskilled of human speech , about my heart--
scarce any other could admittance find .
black without spot , to neptune azure - hair'd .
_ de cire - vierge jaune autour _
out of the song and the sunshine ,
this is the pillow the merchant displayed :
so hope success , or dread the dire effect , ”
his country 's pride , his country 's stay :
i see it not , nor hear adieu .
they are doomed to wear no other dress ;
sweet woodland music sinks and swells ,
the time that is to come is not ;
full oft for less have i largess showered ,
on some february morn
ho ! boys , hili ho !
found , all too soon , the deepening rut
we read no more . "   while thus one spirit spake ,
avec un simple et très doux visage ,
my only reward,--the pleasure i am getting now .
dreadful , hateful , fell ,
patter of monastic feet ,
the rooms are fine , the furniture profuse ,
beamed approbation .
it came with the threat of a waning moon
to autolycus . i had left her alive when i set out for troy and
i said , " my love you made me wait ,
sudden the knight awoke
expos'd my life to winds and winter seas !
nor soothing sense of windy trees .
from golden throats -- stories of ardent days ,
doubtless in eden thou didst blush as bright
god , in the hour of peril , may protect !
where warm winds loll on the shady deeps ,
this to angelica so much endears ,
his trophies won , displayed :
and what the christ had done for him
and firm , as if they had been hewn and hollowed
stream ,
amid the peril of uncertain ways .
our place and nation .
and still she patters
this is my bark,--a pygmy 's ship ;
buy a frond o ' fern
then the aged vaeinaemoeinen
with high - hung tokens of its pride
we rose , and greeted our brothers , and welcomed our foes .
the triple world be all undone .
absolute will agrees not to the wrong ,
charged , under odoric , with the galley 's care .
i 'll say -- my childhood broke through chords of music
slay her with his proper paws ,
in golden letters , plainly to be read ,
of lucy 's shoe .
with the blushing light of day ,
you , who in evil days of yore ,
so keenly wakes our local ecstacy ,
the color - sergeant said .
shall ne'er be truly blest .
breath of perfume exhaled from her presence , and made
there in the sun .
laughing all she can ;
let the sullen boulders hear my cry ,
instructions to tommy , who again took up his
smith made , and gibson demolished . "
star to star vibrates light : may soul to soul
that old fool
came from the neighboring hamlets and farms the acadian women ,
when tatter'd stockings ask my mending hand
i would adventure there , and bring it her .
he does n't mind
to break the order 's power : that way i know ;
with prospering shade embower me , whilst i sing
why , still unfearing , she gave way
shall i follow his passing over the grass
she dwells
with the deluge of summer it receives ;
and on the breast of the bard at rest
of they who listen to its thrilling power .
men say it bloomed upon the sepulchre
and i will pledge with mine ;
be that the time with happy fate
a secret word or twa , man ;
and so he hawks your jest about ,
and hasten eagerly to meet
drenched all day long with murmuring sound and spray .
" e'en now i seem to view . "   from the other side
a workhouse ! ah , that sound awakes my woes ,
to part with you the same :
all sadness for it , therefore , lay thou by .
' ha -- haw -- haw i we 've got him safe at last ,
race of dardanus , peer of gods in council , rose and with all
caressing idle hands of clay ,
it was in thebes it happened thus ,
while black forebodings rise from deeps unknown
o begone , then , from among us !   echo not , however faint ,
and sighed for her soft embrace !
( how distant that , imports us not to know ,
we passed the poor old fellow , a - tuggin ' away at his cart .
craves curtsied leave , with roseate blush ,
a glory everywhere .
but the night - wind answers , " hollow
florence , then florence shall i never enter . and what then ! can
which caught the muslin frock she wore ,
that bright eternal beacon , by whose ray
a longish way -- a longish way -- with ten year more to run .
and from the chariot fell half - lifeless on the field .
his much loved wife possessed some rare good sense ,
and to new ones gives birth .
strays , mindful of that heavenly love
had remain'd , while the beauty and youth , unredeem'd
yet shall men venture for the love of laws
looked through and through the pattern and found not
for the surrounding district , to obey
but then he 's o'erloaded with fat .
--"i list no more the tuck of drum ,
there never was king , and never will be ,
the moon is hung in its topmost spaces .
to - morrow -- why , to - morrow i may be
and her two whelps ; and sicyonian catch :
answered thus wild lemminkainen :
ambition rends , and gaming gains a loss ;
in de massa 's fiel ' ter hoe ,
when from the smithy fire
jealous , beloved ? of a shade?--
we tore our feet in half buried rocks
des muthigen meergängers , mächtig zuwider ;
would next have caught , whence angrily their chief ,
turns from their longest labour , as we steered
for my babes ' sake i cleansed those infamies .
now kabîr , as we might expect in one whose reactions to the
and yet repines at destiny ,
inherits by his father ’s grace
the freedom so longed for is given .
went before the judge , who bowed and burst the doors of hell .
and many an endless , endless lake
and left her maiden couch , and robed herself ,
inquire'd the meaning ; when the duke did say,--
for they sell you fixed bay'nets that rots out your guts--
metrical paragraphs , or , as some would even call them , stanzas .
of northern russet , wiped his rheumatic knees ,
and you must bring the holy priest
i wot the wild fowls are boding day ;
she does not stay to wipe her eyes ,
harmless upon a roof , so long the stones
to the joy of his bride and is lovely in her eyes--
damp . once more let me < i > implore</i > you to return . no ? then i
" a rubber doll on a distant limb
with a sigh i spake : " oh , thou cruel poseidon ,
till the ebenezer chapel looked more like
with a prayer for those who slew him ,
were it not better to bestow
o morning red ! o clouds ! o rain and snows !
and may his mercy shine upon us clear ,
ah , desperate folly !   yet , we know ,
where in the sadness of the fountain 's tone ,
said the handsome kaukomieli ,
the queen of love ) , the sire of gods bestow’d
beat , muffled drums !     toll , funeral bell
landlocked amid the mountains , so my soul
ev'n those who dwell beneath its very zone ,
to hear , one day , report from those who came
tommaso loves me -- we are happier
that garden pleasance did prepare ;
with slep and bothe his yhen fedde .
« mira el tuyo aquí » ;
" ha , wher was evere under the hevene
how oft , how sad , how loud she cries !
if now we conquer , see the praise , the gain ! --
in the realm of shades i cry,--
todo lo puede quien al mar sombrío
sank back in sleep , and all her joints were loosened as she
mount ossa and olympus ' gainst his throne :
for always visions in the night , moving about
rose en forme de coupe , vase rouge où mordent les
mount -- drive we swift away -- lest borne so far
where , underneath the white - thorn , in the glade ,
and rapp'd at the yett o ' claverse - ha ' lee ;
yon curtains trees , to wave in summer 's face ;
with slow , deliberate pace ,
was burned to ashes ; in the orchards fed
and the old faith gone ,
he is found at the " mug"--
then they came forward , mr . clark arranging his
ahti , _ a name of lemminkainen _ .
with swelling at the jaws : the conquering steed ,
an ' had good marks , an ' teachers said :
all the lovely unfoldings of luminous science ,
you must be a great friend , for this was kept
arriving , loosed his coursers , and around
sturdy sons and comely daughters , growing up from childish plays ,
at nos inlepidum , rudem libellum ,
and by ill imitating would excell )
" in thy chosen way abide thee ,
the tarrying still . "   my leader part pursu'd
with all the servile wretches in the rear ,
the axe has vanished from the yard ,
what things to thee can mischief do ?
gods , whom art ever must avow ,
the fairest , deiopeia , shall be thine . "
the scots beheld the english host
before which , bowing down
if you eye it a minute 'll have the same look :
attend their steps , some follow , some precede ,
the clatter of the reapers come and go .
but gif ye want ae friend that 's true--
and follow through the madman night ;
so never think to cast a clout ,
i can not be , that i should fear to change it .
the grand self - sacrifice that made us what we are !
may not unseemly with its stillness suit ;
o lily land of france ,
since this old world began ! )
three , o eagle , two , o raven ,
my sheep are lost for want of food
and namely , sin troye hath now swich nede
looked steadily at the caps of those in front of them ,
these states defended by the brave ,
lo , its name is character !
a thing incredible i tell , tho ' true :
with all the proofs from first to last ,
who have laid them down to sleep
a deadly axe was this unhappy close ,
and , as in love , he was in swich gladnesse ,
as ministers to the radiance of her brows
as they carry fodder / to their young in the wood .
and yet anon repairs his drooping head . "
winter sighing
his tail wus short an ' chunky .
" from the spark , o bride of beauty ,
on every citadel ;
faithful to love , not faithful to the lover ,
and groped with dim surmise ,
is weather proof ;
don juan , almost famish'd , and half drown'd ;
askest how thou may'st lightly loaded be ?
his prologues in which he speaks in his own person . they give the
who emulous swam on the open sea ,
his hunting hollo
he had n't breathed the prairie air more than a day or two
and o , its one reward
though fate and death make a dark background against which the
nala the mighty , dear to fame ,
_ from a painting by _ f. c. yohn . ]
following :
to the wizard , kullerwoinen .
nothing mysterious , nothing unearthly , --
like the worthy of uz , heaven prosper'd his piety .
let all our conduct on that day be orderly and quiet ,
and cut off their heads with smiles and smirks .
his thin dark visage seen but half ,
then add there 's still that plaguy hundredth chance
and those who flung it to the winds like rain ,
heptisax af skepti ;
and in his breast so boiled fell despite ,
when i have seen the hungry ocean gain
was in her eyes a thing the most atrocious .
since that happy night , when we whiskt thro ' the air !
and as this wax is soften'd by the same ,
far in the woods , these golden days ,
by a kick in the ribs or a pat on the head .
that i 'll never go to battle ,
the thrush replyes ; the mavis descant playes ;
through the dark earth , and through the wondrous sea ?
love that so desires would fain keep her changeless ;
the warrior 's pride , the hunter 's mirth ,
but i would come away
is it real ? or one of fancy 's shows ?
wavered , then staggered backward , hemmed by foes .
but we lived on the square , like a true - married pair ,
speaking lastly , yet abounding
that all the gods which saw his wondrous might
nation ,
like flowers from paradise
like one in danger ; cautious ,
no , nor grew dark when autumn brought the clouds .
a gathering weight on roof and tree ,
like waning stars ! lo there , her pale sad face
young wings are drowned in you .
from the back another drives ....
" may i eat dirt if thou hast hurt of me in deed or breath ;
we heard the spirits sing ,
he seized on the body of billy barlow .
with silver scutcheon round their neck ,
those feigned arms he forced me to devise ,
from her bed rose laughing water ,
i want to be red , and i 'm all over blue . "
then edward , little noisy wag ,
you see the fates have given him so much ,
soon as the minstrels ceased to play
hope ye mercy still ?
that thro ' misleading darkness stream so bright .
synglure , uniqueness , a. 8 .
strong chest , where her drapery rustles ,
and croak'd as loudly as before .
i had gone out upon the slopes for herbs ,
but now between the warring strings there grows
so well it pleased her taste .
nor yet know i.
and sanded floor .
from atween these cherry lips ?
and strike proud haco from his car ,
with its trencher . sweeter dishes
and while the hearth - flame burns it is a good world after all .
river . then goodly odysseus spake among the maidens ,
in the boundaries of mana .
first does the longing lover right .
turns to right scope .   for lovely moving intricate
and the horse that mocks at fear .
and thiderward thei hasten blyve .
shall dawn in glory , and solstitial blaze
doth foot it featly , and advances scarce
in aarons brest - plate , and a stone besides
but you unto religion wrench aside
fresh with the dew of a summer morning ;
and how long ago ,
once more towards them the tide of battle swept ;
holy angels and blest ,
you were barred of all advance !
lest slighted woman should be graced
oh , when its aged branches throw
--this , this breaks my heart ! "
round my bed while i am sleeping ,
hasten to the river - border ,
when pleasure leaves a touch at last
mine eyes , and thus the teacher : " at the least
restrain your tears , and cease your plaintive moans .
may make completer music roll
till now , he 's twenty - three ,
sis ortus et verbo editus ,
among the gods , upon olympus old ,
as she worked out the scheme she had planned--
hot manacles of love and their cost .
siue die laxatur humus , seu frigida lucent
to plead for me in yonder skies . "
robert is singing with all his might :
then come , my lad , extend your hand ,
the azure flowers that blow ,
that sche was wo bego withal ,
for thee a funeral bell shall ring ,
she fled to me and wept .
so may we purify ourselves , as christ our lord is pure .
" but two miles more , " to herself she said ,
with the woodbine alternating ,
i can not sink , i can not climb ,
in twenty manners could he trip and dance ,
“ adieu ! dear husband ; sister dear , adieu !
or for colean the rout is ta'en ,
out of the pump the sailor 's nasal blare ,
i plight to thee my son instead,--
will it bear upward when my life is fled .
carry heaven through every glade ;
i saw them come , and now they have returned ,
the laverock walk'd mute ' mid the sorrowful scene ,
heigho , says rowley ,
of ardor quenched , and honor faded ?
ill it is without the moonlight ,
and a sheet webbed over my candle , susie , ---
there is a tide in the affairs of men
this and more i sat divining , with my head at ease reclining
have made her paint - work like a rusty grate .
smote down the fiends like tall trees rent
a noble type of good ,
even the trees have let their glory pass ,
thy course in earth 's bewildering ways ,
from this wide waste of troublous sea
an if my foes it be not ; / here stay they every one .
her shadowie cloud withdraws , i am to haste ,
remember'd constant , and repeated most .
the storm which bore him vanished , nought
where misfortune 's children rally ;
the earth is a place on which england is found ,
hagen , the false man , had counselled this .
tityrus , happilie thou lyste tumbling under a beech tree ,
' had collatinus kill'd my son or sire ,
there are thoughts that make the strong heart weak ,
proposals for the publication of a couple of volumes of poems
the wisdom of age , and the folly of youth .
the hour , whose happy
that is no longer the form of a hound !
to the great father lifts her pale glad eye ,
his forehead crush'd and batter'd in ; his eyes
we breathe a welcome to our bowers of green !
and hear the wild - fowls ' clangor sink
and is stung blind by bees ?   i am that beast ,
she beckons , she nods not , her heavy head falls o'er ;
“ with gold and fillets gay , the beast is led
who though in death hath the office of his life .
in the ground ,
companions will not fail him , and enriched by past experiences ,
an extract from ` the symphony ' , and ` the crystal ' .
earnest , earthless , equal , attuneable , | vaulty , voluminous , . .
illustrious ulysses and myself
on silvery slippers steps with bosom bare ,
nevertheless not my will , but thine , be done .   st . luke xxii . 42 .
a clambering , unsuspected road ,
hear my vow before i go .
" that us rejoisit mounting in the sky ?
with wassails of nut - brown ale ,
through the tangle of his whiskers ,
then the sun , with a hotter light blazing ,
severed the spine where no joint was found ,
a present in whose reign no grief shall gnaw
what stocks to buy , how to invest -- it almost crazes me !
that charged was with fruit , and up he went ,
ah , why suffer it to be ?
great gloriana took her woman 's way ,
the floods are in the ocean ,
thou hadst departed for the pylian coast .
and drew from out my breast .
and drive him on from land to land .
and corry , the bould connellan ,
would hint at worse in either . her own son
i met the finest ram , sir ,
and teach him to pretend he 's dead ,
" i know where the timid fawn abides
at last his time was up , and sam returned
his nature no man can o'er - rate ; and none
of a beautiful lady in bridal array . "
of the earth , of the mother , my heart with her heart in accord ,
his eyes , upon the full - orbed moon to gaze --
but enoch and two others .   half the night ,
the persian empire is in arms . to - night
ne conscii sint ipsi maleficii suis .
colorless grow utterly ;
besides , full twenty nymphs of trojan race
och , johnny , i hardly knew ye !
and i handed my card , “ mr . william barlow . ”
think not that i , to triumph moved ,
heard the curtain of the doorway
see , by the fervent heat embrowned ,
and books from life have made thee fugitive .
" but in the course of circling years i view
that her spirit might have rest .
for dance and jig and psaltery ;
for thogh fortune make hem wynne ,
far less are seen . red are his sparkling eyes ,
not the largest , nor the smallest ,
the wily mother sees the conscious flame
and none with thee in gentleness compete ,
in such a fight as this ' tis not a staff
hans ( lays his finger on his nose . )
or hast returned again to where thou wert
you 'll have mr . brallaghan ;
and summons all the senate of the skies .
circean pleasure , rescuing did she stand ,
and street and tower , and temple old ,
are spread , where'er the moist earth drinks the day ,
with all perfection , blemishless and high ,
dews shudder from it , and no man would be
haply , what this red disk may be , he guards .
his feet were large , his hands were pimply ,
had smashed the cellar pane .
thus spoke her own beloved boy ;
they bring their broken toys to him
the days we never can forget .
of one prayer that thrills all days .
speak , that my torturing doubts their end may know !
have been employ'd to sweeten your 's .
and round thy phantom glue my clasping arms .
then with his pupil humbly bent
and here is a kiss for the treasure that lies
instead of fragrant posies
dorinda 's sparkling wit and eyes ,
deep , deep glow of stedfast eyes ;
sorrow there was , yet nought was there severe .
while they at home sustain his happy load . "
exhausted , leans on all that can impart
he entered not the nation 's promised land
within this soul of thine ,
hover'd and buzz'd his wings , with fearful roar ,
seeing wolves and dogs and birds that plague - strike air
she dropped her eyes and shook her little head ,
what title , or what name , endears thee most ?
and he has bound a snow - white plume upon his gallant crest ,
would ye have smiles that ne'er grow dim ?
i saw how he wrung his hands in anguish .
and again the place where remain
- are ye not weary and faint not by the way ,
therefore inhale this healing balm ,
there fits some dread , some heavy , punishment
sent it seething to the fire - pit ,
so late the pride of england 's fertile soil ,
and the tall plumes waving bright .
roll’d on the king his eyes , and thus begun :
ah ! the singing , fatal arrow ;
his boots so stout , so squat , so square ,
what was n't improper as being a sham .
and every man and woman .
the angels , the clear - souled man proffered the sacrifice .
seem’d as extinct : day ravish’d from their eyes ,
fragrant twilights with his song ,
or rich cheese pressed for the unthankful town ,
or lengthened thought that gleams through many a page ,
dashed at the mirror his iron glove ,
the rev . alfred john church ( born 1829 ) is known chiefly for his
nor of the appointed quarry his staunch sight
on hours when we shall meet again ;
and as he who falls and knows not how , by force of demon that
but with that cruel weapon lost their life
small wonder now that eochaidh 's leaping heart
and out again .
" how was that managed ? "
played as in the hemlock branches ;
and guid'st the pilgrim to his home .
he 'd seen his duty , a dead - sure thing--
indeed , i never knew what people meant
undertaking the supplement , brought in a few days some scenes for
offer up vow nor pray'r . "   i answering thus :
long ago the monks from their snug self - devotion were driven ,
the owl his silent soul relieves ;
far , far away in boston woods
so she made gardens which he would not dig ,
the sad anemone reclined her head ;
the ocean lay behind ; and yet my boat
" oh ! not beneath the enfeebling , withering glow
for your great labour say what is your wage
bob came to these there were no blotches then .
as moral conscience .
love or unlove me ,
this fear , so sad to all -- to me
all the greatness of england about her there ,
the sick in body call for aid ; the sick
blest cross - bearer , source of good ,
and flitter and flutter and sigh .
there little nude , do n't cry , do n't cry !
but in the meane tyme deuourynge vsurye
" some day " proving -- no day ! here 's the puzzle .
has ceased at kirkland mill .
careening tow'rds the shallows as they turned ,
to william ; then distresses came on him ;
who saw before his searing eyeballs swim
thou canst move through fields of acorns ,
and thick young herbs and groups of flowers
" come in , " he said , " and play awhile with me ;
and see him take a priuate seat ,
and still it is my fairest dream--
sighing , i murmured , ' o mihi pretaeritos ! ' "
i know not if thou take me right ; i mean
so radiant , i could not endure the view . "
sails of sea - ships ne'er saw i of such size .
and in half a second he swept away .
' whene'er they point , they 're certain of their game .
yea amid that fair abode ,
merrily his small fins plashing .
beginning at the druids down to the present day .
match for all rivals ; in himself but flame
who am always on the side of wisdom ,
if he had lived , of him whom i deplore ,
a century of silent suns
it darkens ! shocks ! excruciates ! and confounds !
far down in the deep ,
the laws of earth into its broadening breast
keep me , lord , with thee . i call from out the dark--
we shied at him , in careless glee ,
but the substance of my grief
no one else beholds such wonders ! "
a fortune by the gainful trade
domum atque dulces liberos
but brightest yet o'er all the rest
our better mind , himself is now our aid . "
on the snow - capped hills of northland .
then the flying columns follow .
qui genero sua iura simul cum dote dederunt .
am lost in admiration . "
nor he , the king of war , the alarm sustain’d
the cuckoo , perched on a tent - pole hard by , answered for them .
like frost - bound bulbs , that yet shall start and bloom ?
and the crab has struck with his giant claw .
their morning - game , and gathered round to mock
shouted , and flung them , outspread , on the straining necks of my
beside his bourbon bully 's gloatings
rested five years in the ocean ,
sought in the western wilds oblivion of self and of sorrow .
“ returning , he the darling statue seeks
lairs of disease , of the white death !
despising wind , and rain , and fire ;
with fifteen hundred bowmen bold ,
  having named the mecon , or meekhaun , a river of cochin china , he
atque eadem nobis vigilantibus obvia mentes
on lips that rarely form them now ;
we rustled through the leaves like wind ,
bowed with too heavy a burden of defeat .
denied , nought else so worthy of regard ,
i never gave death so much as a thought , but was the first to
beyond a mortal man impassioned far
mountains of madagascar ,
what blasphemy to reason , sets thee free !
too often bored on my account .
and doubt mocked at the dwindling light :
should go on consistently to " the last perfection of art . it was
and blithe it is cytorus to behold
in the match , for her sake ,
such is bumtagg , whose history i resign ,
prince bharat on his way to lead .
pass through his door .
  on ' peterhouse ' see our memorial - introduction , vol . i. and essay
the face that haunts your pillow , or the light
but syth that our lorde hath ordeyned
ne'er blessed a lover 's eyes ?
the steep , ascending stages
filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude ,
have past behind us . "   as one , mountain - bred ,
( trusting that he had forgot)--
took us on patrol .
with wounded limbs and shattered crown
which yet she seemed to grudge i should stand on :
and , touching with his lips the hilt - cross , swear
and waste 's his life to merit your applause !
he must read _ grotius _ upon war and peace ,
that tells of heat and never a cloud
but he , the overbold adulterer ,
what stateliest stag so fast and fleet ?
is strewn with many flowers , sweet and fair ;
rang the beautiful wild chimes
oh , i must n't look round , i 'd forgotten ,
protestant religion with tyranny , learn from grattan that it is
crown or stone set cunningly ,
straddled the thin part .
the stile is lone and cold ,
fortune relieves the cruelties of fate .
but somehow matters seemed extremely brief ,
that other men have won as brave as he--
_ chorus juvenum . _ far hence be all speech that may anger move :
i pluck you out of the crannies;--
how , when the vapours humid and condensed
and with childlike , credulous affection ,
seeing he sits high - throned above them all ,
faring where'er you may ;
presume , duke , to ask you what , ever until
he thought was worth defending ;
his lif , his deth , his wo , his wel ;
its long paths strewn with dead branches , living
of gathering years shall call the slumbers forth ,
on doting me when i go by ;
a bonny bit ,
and drew the eager edges out .
and all about was mine , i said ,
guests have i none other whom i hold so dear .
with circles still widening and ever ascendant ,
all the caves and creatures i never saw before .
the wale o ' the parish was tipperty 's jean .
each moment at the motion brisker !
as young birds , or early wheat
and whereon everybody did declare
the mould'ring halls of thy chiefs to survey ;
filling the air with fragrance sweet .
well pleased to share the feast , amid the quire
o give me back the sight of him , and grief is all gone by .
of empery beginning with a god ;
of schrifte , why we sitten hiere
would fain have brushed and tied ,
that the one may hear the other ,
surround him .
going up to him among the assembled argives and saying , " take
good humor with his fellow beings and himself , surely ,
than making some young soul the home of truth ,
where now the seamew pipes , or dives
he for a soil no longer by the feet of angels trod ,
here i give back the keys of my door -- and i give up all claims to
for soone comes age that will her pride deflowre ;
days ,
prec .      nay , come no nearer .
friend ! trouble not yourself about your lot ,
a little tournament at bridge is my
lightly he plac'd us ; nor there leaning stay'd ,
he gazed : he ceased to smite
to within one penny of what he is worth .
to waft my meed of tribute through .
his war - cry shouting , urg'd his fiery steeds .
my heart her throne , her kingdom ,
and mightily likes his ease;--
great naya , too , shall glorious here display
the sheep within the fallow field ,
more dangerous faintings by her desperate cure .
no . iii.--what mr . robinson thinks ,
frolic stamp'd on ev'ry feature :
trouble the bright
the sacred impulse of the may
the pines that moss its roots . o , even now ,
hear me , for love of heaven ! -- what done i done ,
no millionaire could ever own
but all her blandishments successless prove ,
trying for duty up against the thorn .
luz , peñascos , torrentes y cascadas ,
and has a doubt of a ' that ?
_ how they brought the good news from ghent to aix _ , 464 ;
reclaimed -- even so were the dense phalanxes of the trojans driven
might mark at least the fortress and main tower
and interwoven with the sense a mystic something rings
and neither speech nor language shall prevail
the shield and dagger of androgeus ; so
old aden , like a barrick - stove
brave chieftains they sought , and young minstrels they sued her ,
the old meter of the _ romance _ was adopted as a favorite
" who , bolder even than nemrod , think to rise
yaud , an old mare .
praying -- alas , in vain!--
when once in english woods i heard a lark .
non absunt ; illic saltus ac lustra ferarum ,
its frost o'er every tombless head ,
the monk with unavailing cares ,
he wove a song that can not die .
he was a trustee of a savings bank ,
god bless ye for the faculty that tops all human arts ,
divided more and more is labour
i 've had time to gather ...
thou shalt have possets , wassails fine ,
see it sparkling round about , like iron that issues boiling from
clok'd their beginning ; for the last he spake
which kindleth them , decreed .   and when each one
who cries above the darkling world in scorn ,
thy place in paradise
the ground darkened only in front of me , i turned me to my side
the fairest in all the land ;
the nest you built together and made fast
on the borders of the marshes ,
haethcyn hrethling of hope and life ,
these in the body plac'd , on either hand
has perchance the old nokomis ,
but , straining through the mists , our spirits trace
obedient , faithful , good and true ?
busy digging graves and hunting ;
spirits busy to do and undo :
and chase the roebuck through the snow .
to him there fallen , that his offspring still
he whose knowledge is the greater ,
--if worth lay in a flatt'ring tongue ,
let elemental things take form again ,
the widow of a labouring swain :
as faith had not been shine : without the which
an ' forget in ither 's arms every earthly care ,
date : probably late sixth or early seventh century .
seized hatchet , bar , and crow ,
and love came gushing from her heart ,
to make your merry blood run slow !
with bombers posted , lewis guns well placed ,
he makth the ferre lieve loth " :
ever and mightiest , breathes from a great poet 's lute !
incurring short fatigue ; and though our years ,
all such affairs were then conducted in regular fashion .
old fuller 's saying , wise and sweet ,
do you remember the stretcher - cases lurching back
wrapped in fleecy clouds and white ;
for priests the busy spiders hang festoons between his
" no good thing comes from out of kaiserland , "
to lethe , as an old greek signpost showed .
this is the patent - age of new inventions
and still she looked , and still the terror grew
that if before the dews arise ,
" the hero and the heroine
o mighty counsellor , this day
the joy that in our hearts we bore
you would couch with us in the golden straw
new doubts have sprung .   for from without if love
then those that stood upon the hills behind
to grace , by baptism , hath my soul restored .
though every golden dream i had
and let them drop down on my knee to - night .
when good men cease to live .
that little pretty bleeding part
their spirit forms unshadowed glide
how they vary their accents in vain ,
or touch the tears unwept of bitter love ;
repent , my dear fellows , and each get a post :
the fateful stone upon the image rolls !
but , when quae genus ask'd th ' amount ,
to the dazzling , sheer cascade ,
from him the glorious kukshi sprang ,
then tosseth her high
and wind thy thoughtful way ,
far shone the fields of may through open door ,
and silent his harp as the gloom of the grave ,
o , aid me with thy help , omnipotence divine !
wrapped in your hood of green ,
swell thy wave up to me and gulf me in ,
i would thou hadst been blind !
my childhood 's friends now passed me coldly by .
heed not the sunna , nor the law divine ;
altho ' his hair began to arch ,
with such atyr as tho was used ,
in happier times , before the dawn of war ,
they only helped the murderer with council 's best advice ,
yet the heavens forbid
how doth a little fling wound thee sore !
o angel , to thy breast ? "
i never loved a tree or flower
youth and maiden bright ,
with baited smiles if he display
they dread the demon 's impious might , nor dare
whether you please that sylvan scene to take ,
and then to flash he cried ,
i have a sapphire that i turn
it looked when deep i dug for it a grave,--
turning the waste thy people trod ;
in whom desire is waken'd , and the hope
time 's creeping shall the dreary space fulfil : _
but lo ! this rock ! we can not climb it , so
of a golden city of london
we held to jove omnipotent , and slew
young jamie lo'ed me weel , and sought me for his bride ;
ye silvery birds of snow--
the farther shore two miles away .
as pierce the golden foam
is settled right ' round here .
of which i fondly claim a part ?
ever ready with his mischief ,
and i -- you bet , i laugh , too !
i win the argument , i next will teach
the wound seemed too deep for this world e'er to heal ;
_ so many times over comes summer again _ ,
should disenthrall thy soul .
the poet 's distresses , when fortune oppresses ,
if _ art _ , or _ nature _ , form'd me what i am ;
or ' tis an engine wrought with craft bane of our walls to be ,
then the aged vaeinaemoeinen
it is whiter than venus , redder than mars ,
for resurrection , good to greet :
whistling each his cheery song ,
with faint molecular melody ;
so that of all the mounting summer 's wealth
and , looking on myself , i seemed not one
or his image carved from stone ?
in all america are free !
so weary a world it lies , forlorn of day ,
when the lights were soft in the waters ' shine--
merit of a poem , must at length be conceded , when a number of
it yifth , so that verrai prouesse
with grating sound the pond'rous masses rang .
lifeless and cold the reeling body fell .
when far - off watchers think they die .
the tapir returns to his home in the fens ,
no ear their import can discern afar ;
and ye that guard them , mountains old !
with the breath in our nostrils , on the king 's highway .
he . beside the question altogether . what do you intend to do ?
they made her gargling voice
pr . i knew thy heart would fail not at the hour .
falling he earns the blessings of a land .
one to set , and many to sing ,
she told herself that she must find her son .
yes , while he gazed above ,
parson is a good ' un .   i 've known ' i m from a lad ;
the lady woke . " dear prince , " she murmured ,
feathered from above
by stairs like this we henceforth down must fall .
down to the deep abyss the flaming felon strook .
and never want it , for i quite intend
under the green - wode tree .
we goe not to seek
down pallet on the floor .   she would sometimes take three or four
in lanes of laurel and of rose .
swift in the path their majesties would tread
for i know i 'd just be longing for the little old log cabin ,
comes for answer back to me .
whahl doon i't ' dust ther poor awd lims
and at present he 's young enough plenty ;
but fishing - boats in need
for those poor gifts i have sent from year to year .
as he rides with his kossak band !
nearer , ilmarinen 's dwelling ,
that beside the monarch / may care ne'er come to thee .
( thou ) art .            ( thou ) was , watȝ .
and out of nature 's now - enriched dominions
of some bright angel,--his ecstatic note ,
even to see . life loves to change .
the walks with moss were overgrown ,
they are the first to go astray .
and over mastered by his choler , flies
the kinges that ben innocent .
his eccentricities .
then up and gat the seventh o ' them ,
vergilio annuerunt gaudentes rure camenae(172 ) .
thus ' tis with mortals , as it is with flies ,
their source was lofty and their aim was pure ,
when all the summer sweets were fled .
the king bethoghte him al that nyht ,
baa ! baa ! said the sheep ; oh , no !
thou canst not mend these things if thou dost come .
of famine bears , where others yet must pine ,
and the assuaged heavens mellow with light .
to the chamber where i lay ,
but he sure was headed in .
and the natives call them " home boys " ,
where ores of every tint are bright .
of falswitnesse , whan thei saide
of thousands , seeing them , shall wish his own .
where 's the hand to wreathe them ?
thyself most fair and potent beast of ravin ;
in spite of our wisdom
of every craft is he . ”
explicit , quite conscious . when ulysses comes back to ithaca , and
at bie grændel her ,
an individual bent on pillage ;
well now , who art thou then ?
pale writhe the lips , the murmurs fail ,
filled with a tender lore ;
if he be hye the sorer is his fall
and the soft ring - dove ,
and that , too often , at the best ,
green will be all the grove , and jupiter
then -- as a stream that spouting from a cliff
the preacher who dares talk of god ,
epirus and buthrotus , by the seer
there to sport among the billows ;
up the hill to simoorie -- most patient of drudges--
of songs she learned when she was free .
the kitten 's tail would stand on end ,
these dear - bought pleasures had i never known ,
why , he is n't worth a dollar !
and , sweet sprites , the burthen bear .
_ " o. d. , " it just means olive drab . _
but late us falle awey fro this matere ;
and in my sight a circle of the sea
that we are but stray atoms on the wind ,
she hardly made a stir ;
gilding the foliage , glorying the flowers ,
a grave in the frozen mould .
the sun the candlestick , the earth the shade ,
of him which yeveth non almesse
and sparrows sitting on the wires ;
toward the shadow - side of the rocks .
of a man without a soul .
close it grows beside her portal ,
but i mauna speak high when i ' m tellin ' o't ,
we 've day 's long light before us ,
thereto he found full ready / the heroes valiant and good .
for somewhere , dear , there 's a magic land
you will be made into books !
' tis deeper , sweeter ,
and ' mid their ruins , like an exiled man
her ardent mouth that thirsted so,--
but now on frame and spirit weighs
they much affect the papacy .
where are the poets , unto whom belong
_ pegu , whose sons ( so held old faith ) confess'd
and when a rogue fails up and comes to grief ,
you who live in smoky cities ,
odin with lordly look , and frey with the sun on his frontlet .
like a cranberry for roasting ,
the patriot and the statesman too .
but waits till i come : that 's as much to my taste . "
good for a bloke that 's toilin ' on the land ;
works one day and then a second ,
whose undimmed glories gild the night of death :
but not as you are .   there is worse than death ,
" i like your style , so wicked and free .
is martial as e'er marked a caesar 's moving .
the crackle on one plate ?
the fields of art and learning , pleasure , sense ,
and prove thou didst not find it ? i guess not !
valhall , the hall where those slain in battle dwell after death .
because the angels , bidden to receive
te deums to the night , invoking rest
when bodies weighed with satiate passion 's power
camped before his citadel and summoned it to siege--
but i canna get a blink
for he hath slain robin hood . ’
and a third he crossed obliquely ,
maids , and here strew violets .
our emperour shall suffer damage great . "
which to one of his taste , you may be pretty sure ,
the church with saints , and in the tavern with gluttons . ever on
alley which lovelace knew , having been rebuilt more than once
like the mild plumage of the pheasant - hen
the flowers of eloquence , profusely pour'd
in which diana naked stod
ther was a king in thilke whyle
let fate look gruesome and eerie ;
and the woe waxes heavier day by day--
and blessed makes this realm , which thou dost mount ,
then do the streams of that magnesian rock
better to kneel by your still dead form ,
i hae na ony fear .
sit buggia and the city whence i was ,
and such a one as any prince or king
high powers of being that thicken
“ greedy devouring . yet eurystheus lives !
softly he lied and smiled--
in their own shapes , to court the _ maid _ with words
acts through all places , is to none confined ;
and there he standeth like a fool .
and old flash himself
from the shining land of wabun .
as from his laire the wilde beast where he wonns
except when heaven 's ghost - stars were pale ,
and the birds with glistening feathers ,
seeking his den , and very fear gave wings unto his feet ;
draus statt der goldnen lieder ein blutstrahl hoch aufspringt .
" or sure thou art his son !
and fear of thee fore'er hath flown !
of what might come ; the penalty that waits
in my breast , over my heart
to you and the rest i make my best bow .
and after her went hafbur
but they have sad representatives here ;
luminous fans and milky streaks of fire ;
ere upon my bed i lay me ,
of madness will not find its way .
" riseth up , my tormentors ,
cravenly , while the scourge no shudder spares .
spouting to gaping yokels pages of verse ,
when a new planet swims into his ken ;
to each and all one after another i draw near , not one do i miss ,
not , celia , that i juster am
their burden of moon white lilies .
and force destruction to refund her spoil ?
until , winging again , they sweep away .
nay , of such forceful tyranny
but all the rest , as borne of salvage brood ,
you ' eathen , where the mischief ' ave you been ?
that i must dare it , and our zeus commands
thus sin in our parents sown
she kenn'd nae mair , nor open'd her e'e ,
come while the log is a - teending .
who , dying with his incompleted aim ,
drape those scarlet colors over ;
still more attractions to combine ,
" how might we bring them hither " / --spake the mighty king--
names in the darkness passed and voices cried ;
it shall sweeten and make whole
und she say , " oh , ritter hugo ,
to take your other arms in your despite .
your every garment i have known ,
of sun and moon , o then into our breasts ,
the difference to me !
bedecked with bays and rosemary ;
fullest of love , and of most ample space ,
which time has saved from ancient days .
and nowhere tarry by the way ,
" can they forget when , half afraid ,
that kissed the flowers good - night .
well i know where to hie me -- in the dawn ,
fraxinus in silvis cedet tibi , pinus in hortis.--wakefield .
after the christ , of those who falling down
come back ?
sound fades into silence,--
' twas brussels , and the loos liège
on whomsoe'er he met .   to me my guide :
not the braes of broom and heather ,
the night has wild dreams in her sleep , the dawn
nor the violet 's humble head .
muller , _ history of ancient sanskrit literature , p. 530 _ .
my waves conflict and black depths show between them .
let highland lads , wi ' belted plaids , vol . iv . , 77 .
and , as that theban monster that proposed
when he , their true deliverer , shall come .
--el alhambra era , señor ,
" though built to keep intruders out ,
the king commands us , and the doctor quacks us ,
which adriane him hadde do ,
murmur in their wintry dreams ,
they was lots o ' fun on hands at the old swimmin'-hole .
i was so near to fairyland -- and then ,
for monie a year come thro ' the sheers ;
ah , with the grape my fading life provide ,
wearer of pearls in your necklace , comfort yourself if you can ,
and does in the pomegranates close
wide o'er the fields of glory bear
not far apart , but hand in hand,--
and sparkled bright with crystal - dropping dew ;
old age ( which few of us shall know )
sprays grated , and the cankered boughs without
thine ear hath heard the bondman 's prayer .
and harsh in manner , cold and taciturn ,
look , there are raghu ’s sons : between
while in my play the falling leaves would cover
have torn my nets by raking in the water ;
respond , oh , tuneful river !
thorny bud and poisonous flower !
and love were like the tune ,
tell me where all past years are ,
and clepede up his chamberlein ,
in various talk , could charm along
to stay the homesick , homesick feet
to - day while i am master still ,
and i wot so even down fell the rain ;
" who beats the gate so stoutly ? " the yawning monster ask'd ;
some of kabîr 's finest poems have as their subjects the
a moon ago there came a cry
heard failure prophesied so oft , been writ
with this in beleticche he takes post ,
sat legislation 's sov'reign pow'rs :
fatigue or pain -- but i am here with you ,
but mete his cunning by the scottish ell !
sung to the bees stealing out and in .
lend your attention now ,
" at least you 'll do the same for _ my _ king . "
time , like a pulse , shake fierce
thyself alone to heaven ! "
the whir of mounting bird : nor thrives about me
transplanted thus how bright ye grow ,
and my eyes were heavy and teary ,
and there 's more to be heard than a wind that grieves
for the angel of death spread his wings on the blast ,
but i wept like a child that day , for the babe had
o'er nile and pharos : we shall at the least
envoys , should be killed and not suffered to return , you shall
" then i took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders ;
geological evidence goes
name , my laura , name the wondrous magic
beyond the sand - hills brown .
here men of every clime appear to make resort .
" she is twice mine , " he cried , " since she is troubled ;
with all his skill and all his might
a hoary - headed , venerable man ,
seem to omit one small consideration ,
hiawatha 's wedding - feast
nexibus , implicitos cohibe diademate crinis .
then spake the mighty monarch , " she thinks no more of this ;
into the second realm .   there i beheld
but some gay dancer in the public show . "
which make it bright .
and he was kind , and loved to sit
i will consider .
the wind had no more strength than this ,
changeless change the law that runs
wounded and spent to the lazar they drew ,
here herte upon such wrong to winne ,
perhaps to a worse meaning than he had .
some small kiss
or pleasant vale , and green plains stretching far ,
o goodness in horror ! o ill not all ill !
for these sing as they dance !
but moved at length by her importunate cry ,
he who is brave , never forsakes the battle : he who flies from it
who after many a victory
comrade of criminals , brother of slaves ,
your even forward march !   not yet too late
with him our joy departs ;
and chears me with kind words and kinder looks !
with blissful emulations fired .
the poor enriched , the rich abased ,
say what i say to thee ; the wealth o ' the west ,
from which he never more went forth
that vaguest infinite -- the dream of fame ;
life is the search of god
as waves on the wine - dark sea ,
one thing i fain would know ;
for thou shalt forge vast railways , and shalt heat
i 'd lose my reputation .
' why dost thou thus my buried body rend ?
he came
desolate birds flew past ; their mewings came
must warp , before my nobler fire
therefore i read that we our counsells call
his rich caparisons ,
and up to heaven the hermit went ,
only he since the world began !
" and spread'st it -- oh , so quick!--thro ' soul and frame ,
lo , on the threshold of thy god
the captain took his sights -- a mate below
on seas that have no name .
nine hundred and ninety - nine depend
time stood , and from his hand the hours , and days ,
as elsa 's numbing waters , to thy soul ,
o , greatest wonder of all !
as eagerly as those that crown
and the songs he sang to the desert sea
" what , yours ! " he said , in great surprise ,
retired , and on the right that marish wide .
disgust ,
how many hearts we must
while bumble bee , in his gold - laced clothes ,
which you remember not .
slowly increases from its lawful seed ,
prepare to bid a long adieu ,
i know not if the love or if the lay were better stuff ,
filled with a fine , old - fashioned grace ,
no prison bars can dim the stars
that bit the grass and ground , alas !
dulcis aquæ saliente sitim restinguere rivo .
the songs they used to sing .
eternal spirit , highest , over all .
grasping the cross of christ by its great hilt ,
“ such toils i bore excessive ; on the land
for the distant , unknown countries .
“ transform'd to lions , and by others fear'd ,
for ere she reached upon the tide
displeasure thee , unless thou wilt deign , o goddess , to
thou to rinaldo show'st the damsel fair ,
of that delightful fragrance which was once
i am given to understand
and , hearkening , till all sense of self is drowned
over the banisters soft hands , fair ,
( on hearing she was leaving the moving - pictures for the stage . )
dreams dyed as love 's own flower , and deeds
in the third circle i arrive , of show'rs
when traitors to freedom , and honor , and god ,
he enjoys the calmy sunshine now ,
thinks i , i guess i 'll go and see where i put the hand .
the governor was struggling , merival
" hast thou then no to - morrow ?
" though dark your suffering is , it may be music ,
all outward things aright .
kindled the land into flame with its heat .
nor let that be forgot ,
the friendships of that time,--ah , me ! they are as precious yet
que es lo menos de su casa
high o'er the grass , hissing he rolls along ,
with awful din ; while neptune shook beneath
pero escuché , de súbito , á mi lado ,
tam did na mind the storm a whistle .
what is your destiny ? what is your quest ?
of all the poets that ever sung ,
of a high hill
  from the time - piece , october 31 , 1797 . the following account of
yet , oh ye powers whose rule is set above
with two full as clever , and ten times as hearty .
attendant on some skilful songster 's voice
to question , but this very day
he wander'd hame weary , the night it was dreary ;
by four deep gaps are entrance given .
fools in their hearts have said , " whence comes this power ,
once more of things , that held my thought suspense ,
my brindle bull - terrier , loving and wise ,
scud black and swift across the sky ;
but john he cried in vain ;
and no person now doth know
' thou makest question of me on my coming , a goddess of a
poured from his bosom , and the long sobs told
miranda 's expedition.--_freneau 's note . _
weeping to him , who of free will forgives .
such act , sweet kendal ! thou might'st justly blame ,
on the dry land walk and wander ,
and we are mighty proud to have it said
nunc quoque praeteriti faciem referentia casus .
with such means us to lead to most sinful desire .
t'wards the reef of norman 's woe .
now , stung with wild ambition 's madd'ning fires ,
' tis pleasant way of taking tea ,
gleaming down to me , lo ! hopeless i rise now .   for about midnight
stood forth the son of nestor ; atreus ' son ,
that filled the heavenly fields , and flung to earth
our royal master is deceived !
now howls the wind and drives the snow ;
he was once a broker
in glorious order roll ,
and , without asking , whither hurried hence !
of trouble , and must know best where
of early bird , that comes a messenger
wilderness of her highways . you are a coward , and your people are
more famous in their lives than he .
it was their wo nt in feasts to spend the night ,
till spite of all the crowded ship
our lofty ilium ; now thy doom is sure . "
we yet can end the quarrel / in peace,--such is my rede--
that study only strange delights ;
man is the tale of narrative old time ;
whilst such as do now strong castles keep
at reading in the sheet:--
a voice is heard that mortal ears hear not
they have thorn , and sting . "
where from the deep his head he rears
all buildings too ; whereby the more would death
while the wind behind is roaring , o :
thus pass away , a shade , a name !
and pay guilt 's debt ere they in glory dwell ,
the two - celled heart beating , with one full stroke ,
at the edge of the water , and hard by the sluice ,
light .
' mong others , a poet 's fame i spied ,
may bloom unseen and die ;
made them beautiful with the passion for rightness ,
shall laugh .
“ resign to you — you cowardly dogs ! a thing i ne’er will do ,
red roses under the sun
you are no longer here .
the fisherman saddleth his good winged horse ,
a weary world to roam .
and when he felt himself at large , turn'd round
as wee , not capable of death or paine ,
resplendent with a thousand gorgeous colors ,
the prussians will be sorry
the alp upon its frigid border wears .
after a thousand years
et quæ tecta superbis
for penelope 's sake and for your own , for you have raised the
beauty must be scorned in none ,
i am out of breath , what ?   i wish to stop .
and soon the year -- a winterling--
in his poursute as it fyndeth resistence
and i 'd see everything start growing .
it yields no mercy to desert
enter from the opposite side don john and maria .
mosser 's tears run down lak rain ;
with his great eyes lights the wigwam ?
or one grown cold with satisfied desire ?
his glorious standard to the wind he spread ,
that waileth upward in hoarse discontent ,
or maisterful , or loven novelrye .
on chakraván’s(720 ) firm - rooted feet .
from the rushing car and the holy air ,
among a number one is reckon'd none :
though as all passes , day and night ,
may change the empty vantages of life
la fuentecilla de enemigo hielo ,
without stains -- in heaven .
would rest upon his hair .
his shame , before his eyes , amid the crowd ,
hung like a roseate cloud along the sky
a babe he came one heart to bless
voices are harsher than they were ,
even from that day , and makes of me a jest ;
but all th'afflicted of a land to take ,
whose song comes with the sunshine through the dark
since she has laid aside her wimple white ,
my angry norn she comes beside him now :
the archives of the past : they were so human !
of gleaming marble .
oath , witness these rites and guard them , that they be not vain .
oft wandered through the valleys rough and dreary
the melancholy crow -- in hurry weaves ,
overcome with agony he implores thy speedy relief . "
i have loved many women and men , but i love none better than you .
all the mountains topped with temples , all the glades '
there stand the shorthorns side by side .
provocat raucas calamo cicadas :
for weel she likit it sud aye be seen .
" there is no man,--no man i see . "
ascending , heard behind us chanted sweet ,
in my ain dear land .
i wish ( i hope i am not silly ? )
despise the shams that may be bought and sold,--
why art thou thus attired in discontent ?
= " instans tyrannus"= , the threatening tyrant . the phrase is from
oftentimes encumbereth a man so that it turns him back from
the house - beams shall fall ,
he slew , and then serranus fair and young .
turn them away i can not .   i call them and i say , " come to my
rings on her fin - gers ,
on her red claws despondent swimming ,
more love unto my life , or can present
would form a lengthy lexicon of glory ,
they and ulysses , counsellor of wrong .
i never was meant to shine ; "
what ills he threatens ; such as shall not leave
and one , who hath conducted him thus high ,
and vengen him of thilke oultrage
can fail to be moved by the pipes of the piper !
spring up on freshened wing , ambrosial gales !
but as that beauty 's sovereign votaress . '
listening to silence as it seemed to be
unopened at her feet :   a tide of fierce
yet over earth , and through the heaven ,
solstitial summer 's heat . to the blanc moon
through barren wastes and ravaged lands ,
whilst glasses brimful to the stars they go round ,
truly humble serv't and friend
as prophecies the words they comprehend not !
like some sore - hearted thing that hideth , pale ,
who , for so many benefits received ,
boreman takes toll , cheats , flatters , lies ! yet boreman , 406 .
grant me your son , to nurse , to wait upon him ,
their mother , offspring of the will
my darling in its cursed hold , —
the glitter of resounding arms is seen .
low on his funeral couch he lies !
first of earthly singers , the sun - loved rill ,
for ye ay shall make the bed to me .
" below the left lappel ? "
soon they knew the worst , and pondered
to rule , as over all he should have rul'd .
but confess i was frightened when suddenly caught
i 'd eat out of a person 's hand ;
that there perchance some devil lurked to slay
but only to discover and to do
learn i from him , who shows me the first love
for he suddenly smote on the door , even
lope de vega , filled with this new fear
played on his cheek : he looked , and he beheld
in the avenue .
with the calm deliberation ,
and , parted two and two , unto their ships
scorch me with farness -- lights that call and call
a poor friendless wand'rer may well claim a sigh ,
friend is a word of royal tone ,
he hath conversed with sun and shower
you shall never remain in thermopylae . "
their hoof - strokes echo away .
and deprav'd tastes have poison'd it ,
i give thee for thy wedding gear , o maid . '
of his poor skull , and strike with all her might ,
what torture lurks within a single thought
then spake her brother giselher : / " sister , to me ' tis told--
her mists , her streaming gold ,
and natheles it may wel be ,
_ and my hawse is on the bust . _
and slight its worth -- ambitious if its lord ;
dear ellen , many thanks i owe
presently they returned and seated themselves at the table .
half - heard murmur swirling beneath
o the happy hours we lay
“ my brother , lord of glorious fame ,
' i -- i can not abide to hear their widows screech . but why am i on
both he offered ere he spoke ;
for thou suppliest all his needs
canto lxvii . ráma appeased .
of thee and me therein ;
no hope of death is to the wretches known ;
come , while the twilight is closing the flowers .
thou canst not spend it , i 'd buy diamond pins
that is not akin to pain ,
to give him solace , in that after him
like thy self , ' neath cloudless skies ,
tow'rds the steep rising our uncertain way . "
there had been no peace in the world below ;
" why dost thou still mistrust ? " my comforter
by all the sayntes that be in heaven ,
that those who have may freely give
are weapons now for other hands ,
hail to the hodmen ,
i got my news from the chinese plate ! )
where deer and pheasant drank .
people i saw beneath it lift their hands ,
who 'll kindly deliver
self - love had never drown'd him in the flood .
that our grief he may destroy :
on every side by brazen boundaries ,
best and soonest whence and what thou _ art _ .
prey of these silent terrors .
multi ; sed omnes inlacrimabiles
there at the end ,
cheeses ;
disdain them , break them , throw them by !
from the vindictive tongue of strife
alphenor saw , and smote his grieving breast ;
the sunlight droops forward
and seem'd visibly drooping and dying away .
' it was my master , ' said the prisoner .   ' i thought i could outdo
to pass th ' impenetrable gloom ,
for feelings causeless , or at least abstruse .
yea , or on christmas cards
ovid , met .
regain'd apace the vantage lost . meantime
while i rejoiced and rowed into the brine ,
i have discover'd to thee , yet behooves
" o come awa , lassie , ne'er let mammy ken ; "
with what fuller colours of morn !
to face the truth - faced false . so in his nest
with the stars just overhead :
we shall a youthful race prepare ;
yet no new sufferings can prepare
together fainted they , together died .
and in such accents , that the queen , deceiv'd ,
where the sun infernal gleams
sweet like the blooms on the young apple tree ,
arms , and the steadfast goodly odysseus caught him fainting
or solitary ; then through shadowy woods
with pain , a weed in a dried - up river ,
it is not so , that woot i wel , pardee .
those patches somewhat screen ;
thus much he said , but they with fancy blind ,
she dances on her toes and crows in wonder ,
kneeling beneath the moon
by paris and apollo , thou shalt fall ,
pale sons of famine , at perdition 's gate ,
but i hate to do it , because it seems
life seemeth only joy !
whate'er betide of weal or wo ,
a text which says that heaven 's gate
" why , not even god would know
and all love departed from me .
there licens'd falsehoods   shall no more prevail ,
in worlds where golf is play'd , himself he 'd shake ,
ut iuueni primum uirgo deducta marito
feeding the loosened sheaves , or with fierce will ,
by the weight of the love in his heart : no renown ,
where mix her waters confluent
in the most barbarous ages , and unworthy
the stout and michty erl of marr
who wanders forth , his home a fragile hut ,
as wanting to pursue
for the rush he has not waited ,
on each of which a pattern stands ,
and ate the cheeses out of the vats ,
where health reform is lived and taught , in strictest harmony .
and stole into the night .
nor ulad when naoise had thrown a sail upon the wind ,
sometimes i can not help but think , dear heart ,
till five o'clock ; he had his tea at five ;
the present terror rushed again ;
ay , she shall deathless be !
of this sweet flow'r : near whom behold the seer ,
and can not tell where to find 'em ;
were illustrated like a book
to captain bull 's division , number six ;
yes , it will be wise , minguillo ,
by wheeling offal , if he will endeavor
robbed of sense , and ravished with ioy ;
shalt win , although the race be long ,
flow like blue veils
at distance hears the hounds and hunters ' cries .
like any man -- pale - faced and feverish - eyed .
" fear not ! as thou hast said , sohrab , my son ,
and the song of a bob - o - link .
i can die -- but canna part ,
the past accuses us with bony hands ;
and the sweet pleiads bind ,
and spoil new worlds wherever found .
but tis a fleeting ray ;
my bosom 's bounds ; my limbs beneath me shake .
when he and southey , following the same path ,
wooers ; whoso shall most easily string the bow in his
in boke as it is comprehended ,
and when in somersaults a stump
tanta soledad
i did myself to death .
over the water that divides us from the voices and faces of our
living a life of eager industry .
cold as the column which the builder rears .
' tis but to go and have been . '--come , little bark ! let us go .
his radiant wing , their brows sublime
darest say i had not killing torture ?
may ferment and be refreshing ? '
the balmy air is soft and still ,
e'en then half spider , sad upon the shreds
the timorous killdee starts and stops
there will spring of a sudden , some time ,
and therefore will give me blood for blood ;
made unseen stars my keblahs of devotion ;
i lov'd thee ; nor wouldst thou with others go
idomeneus , the warlike bands of crete
their tops the green trees lift .   hence gifted bards
from thy bed among the willows ;
that lives though winter storms be o'er ,
the whiche that now al torned in - to galle is ,
and laugh at the shriek of the baffled fiend as his sounding
and the heroes , the oligarchy of earth .
and come , thou wind of the south .
divert the eye with pictured spell ,
to blood , when comes the woeful day whereon
the finger rested on the scar ,
your ocean - rhyme , "
read the arrest of dire alarms
and flooding daylight falls again
" that was just in this instance , " she interrupted , quickly .
' yes , we d at once before us ;
first care , then crime , and waken woes then slumbering .
press the grape , and let it pour
the crops were fast turning russet and gold under the glare of
sing , sing ! what shall i sing ?
it makes me amorous of death ;
up and down and o'er and o'er
thy feet at last shall stand on jasper floors ;
nor i , nor thou , nor any one of these ,
though at some sport or cunning plan
new shaven off an eunuch 's chin ,
thou man that hast thy secret in thy brest
and i sae fu ' o ' care !
upon the ways and conduct of the skies--
" or ever to this mountain were directed
" and weary of the crash of battle cars . "
when , just as the soil tarnishes with weed ,
with his own hands he raises on the shore .
that afternoon we went together
so still repeating their despiteful song ,
more than he in a year ;
beyond the glades of the hesperides ;
( fletcher : _ the faithful shepherdess _ , i. iii . ab . 1610 . )
in its scarlet hood among the wheat .
is there no touch of mercy in thy breast ?
for friends who died in groan - resounding fight .
the redemption of sinners deluded ! the last
had brandimart not perished ; when they hear
sorrow , the gods who begrudged us that we should abide
being black . for it is well known that a superintending
hierafterward myn observance
this cloak was so wise ,
in azimuth ; clocks with wheels ; an astrolabe ;
born with her life , creature of poignant thirst
it 's a little bit of service that is joyous in its
only men 's hearts -- tho ' god shows each its way
and sometime for ease my sachell made i light . "
bothe of the sterre and of the mone ;
about 'em than the nurs'ry rhymes
with his hand upon his horse .
he saw , uprising from the desert bare ,
one block , pure green as a pistachio - nut ,
where then are the ancient weavers ,
i think that they would seem all clear , and wise , and bright .
great thy strong endeavor !
thus be these wight men to london gone ,
with bows , arrows , tomhawks , and other military
and dazzle here no more -- no more presume
and took the lake . two hounds alone pursued ,
bay wreath                             _ reward of merit . _
in a round vase the water moves itself ,
and the mountains , heaving mighty hearts beside us ,
then comes a child , whose face is like the sun ,
a promise too my lucy made ,
from the alehouse and the inn ,
then all this globous earth in plain outspred ,
our feelings ebb back from eternity 's strand ,
and quits her ' nancy dawson ' , for ' che faro ' ,
the soul of the song has fled .
and why do you lean o'er the lilies pale ?
will not fail of god 's love
inspires , and feeds , and animates the whole.--wakefield .
he started from his reverie
' dark woods and rankling wilds , from shore to shore ,
replied , with stern regard : " polydamas ,
the ringing coast ; and that wind - song
with ladies and with maidens ; their grief indeed was strong .
( and mr . russell thinks so , too ) .
una salus mediis ruinis .
said a.--_these little songs display
within this quiet fold ,
at this a group of delegates departed for the door ,
where fresh - blown flowers were bright and sweet .
watching beside her , saw the hues of life
still uttered no complaint .
that wins immortality even while panting delirious with death .
till the moon set the pearly peaks gleaming ,
will force you hence , and in an hour .
he told him of their ties beyond
seven back numbers of augustan reprints which have been listed as
shine sweetly :   thrice my love hath smiled on me . "
janette 's hair                charles graham halpine
kiss me would you ? with my hands
what cometh down the stone - wrought stair
thy humming - bird is in the sun ,
in letters of golden flame ,
chaste - thrilling eyes , fast - filling eyes
where many a heathen fell ; ' and on the mount
as thou shalt own with all thy heart ! '
produced her don more heirs at love than law .
home she was taken to his mine--
shine on , and burn the maiden ’s snowy forehead .
and describes himself as
what god restores him to the frighted field ;
and my own docile mind , reveal .   yet thence
little choruses of praise ;
answered in the words which follow :
bucked and kicked ,
ye years , again roll round !
interpreters of time ,
but though hope our fate entwines ,
tanais ' midmost waves fume to the sky ;
and murmured , as he scanned the list
all born to want ; a miserable race ! "
hippocoon , son of hyrtacus , before the rest leaps out ;
thou hast all thy heart 's desire .
the strange knight ’s face grew keen and red
i dwell not now on what may be ;
holding still his spirit 's birthright , to his higher
she now objects not to become his bride ,
who , angry that the eyes fly from their lights ,
the peony 's blush , the lovely rose 's hue ,
the smiles ’ and loves ’ unconquerable queen !
seem the most solid foundations of firmest earth to be rocking . "
whose marble tanks are ever full
but what am i , that i my love should count
this poem first appeared in dodsley 's _ collection _ , vol . iv . ,
in the northland lives a virgin ,
he heard the sob of breath o'er all the host
and yet , as i told you , there 's only that fly
what heav'n had promis'd , and expounds the fates .
scarce risen upon the dusk of dolorous years ,
a thing to die for , and to wonder at ,
  this does not overdo the contemporary estimate of cornwallis .
felix guttur quod rigabis !
in vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs ,
the snows are melting and the gale
mottled with shadows of the mountain tops
and passed from my vision afar .
prayer shall fetch pity eternal .
i sat and watched her many a day ,
we shall march prospering,--not through his presence ;
and all the moonlight tangled in the stream :
and had it been allowed to speak ,
_ mephistopheles _ . no bound or goal is set to you ;
and whan they came to the kyngës courte ,
from human passion , and reflects
and on past those far golden splendors they whirled .
i saw thee stand all garmented in white ;
and forth to pasture drives his little flock :
he caused the boat to spring a leak .
who were such mighty marshals of the world .
it sang the gift that comes from god
our cry--"we come ! we come ! "
who spy on our business and are not content
of the rats!"--when suddenly , up the face
that lolls upon the stalk .
live in our memory yet .
suited dispatch , now gentle , if the will
so cried she , and they hearkened to the words
and , like the harp 's soft murmur ,
the first poor thought which now and evermore
the name of quite a lively spot --
with a smile on her lips and a tear in her eye .
and loving acts will win her soon the place
where deer and antelope and bear
you joked at shells and talked the usual " shop , "
þe{n } lede lenger þi lore , þat þ{us } me les makeȝ . ”
so we poked a stick in the bottle - green water .
grown heavy with the gold of many thoughts .
if the gloves she was not weaving ,
that , too , which fishy marshes round enclose ,
and prayed where he did sit .
go by like thunder , go by like blasting ,
and brav'd the mighty monarchs of the world .
in nature 's busy old democracy
dim fading now , we now no more behold ;
st . mary 's bells
huntress and her virgin train , " since windsor could boast
in those unfortunates who dined
in whom was gete natheles
in fearefull lust this _ prodegiæ _ meetes ,
nevermore to hear the wooing
gramaire ferste hath forto teche
strikes the half - century with a solemn chime ,
earth looks so little and so low ,
and when boats or ships came near him ,
through my lips to mine heart ; to all its shiftings
the breeze from the embalmèd land
" that birds have souls i can concede , "
followed her with jest and laughter .
from shore to shore , on god 's own errands sped !
their own minds do not know .
" whar yo ' senses gone ter - day ?
and in their polished basins of white stone
but strength and love to thee belong ;
en he got ter stay dar longer
the ladies took the lighter ones to use ,
laß sie betteln gehn , wenn sie hungrig sind,--
that on the sov'ran essence , which it wells from ,
of all its leaves , and all the crannies small
to a creature of the forest ,
though the task be hard as your life is long ;
why , pretty thing ! would you not live with me ?
nor burdened bliss , but truth and love attest
_ wagner . _ i 've had myself full many a wayward hour ,
betide me weal or woe ,
remained the wicked tyrant marganor :
with age , and rules over the valiant koords .
just home and love ! the words are small
europe and in brazil ; with a voyage up the amazon and the xingu .
he asks no other : new ones might be worse :
all her follies ; let her spend
and some nice jam .
' twas in march : still played the winter
of singing birds there is not one ;
in spacious nights ' neath the cloudless moonlight !
to aught save happy living things ;
of such a clod of saturated earth
daß alles sterben und vergehen
and we wald prey us in this plane ,
and under an old oak 's domestic shade ,
the grove with mournful numbers ;
things that , maybe , overthrew
but yet his arm grew neither weak nor slow ,
tannhauser lay and smiled , for in the night
decades and decades ago down in the state of kentucky--
but every night i go abroad
not in heaven 's catalogue--
now what should you think proper for a gentleman to do ?
" too thin , " returned teddy , the crafty .
or it may solve the riddle , that she lends
was sent to school to learn apace .
turns one way and then another ,
where dudon dead lay slaughtered on the ground .
say how or when
there is the thought beneath whose vampire tooth
the loftiest level of the snow - piled fields ,
to kiss thy feet and crown thy head :
too cold for lager beer . "
literature , and vice versa . lyric poetry is the most direct
behynde his backe hym to sclaunder and diffame
so i promised when we we d.
because still vain
see me sailing with surprise .
then like an aged beast to slaughter dooms .
gnawed by corruption , wanting rest :
in galloway sae wide .
may , i have seen men fastened half way up a boat 's mast with
like a blood - drop falling on plume and feather .
and in spite of all that cleghorn
o'erveiled with vines
' try , if you like ; but that 's a nasty hit . '
the stockdoves sit and brood :
who never eat with tears his bread
reading of mary 's wedding till he knew
here broad back'd mountains raise their heads immense ,
cut the ceiling into fragments ,
p'rhaps may love me quite as well oh ,
" a lifeless ghost all day i pine ,
dazzling the mortal 's mind .
which it had no sooner reached than it fell down again , and
as into school he wriggled , they were putting books away--
and drain joy 's awful chalice to the lees .
innocent , and lone , and needy ,
though i can not give thee fires
the rattling showers rose on the blast ;
filled the place ,
what though that light , thro ' storm and night ,
it might have been useful to you or me ,
shall loose his ox for ever from the yoke .
if we but give endurance
stone in a solemn circle , holding the staves which the heralds
suburbs of civilization , and this only .   whose , therefore ,
skie - tinctur'd grain .   like maia 's son he stood ,
look on my head , how it is grey !
by the sweetly murm'ring stream ,
long as a courtier 's out of place--
dare to die with him , for i loathe the light . "
hiding away to shun black fate . but he found all the sort
forgetting her mauve vows the fania fled ,
how dreary your murmurs throughout the lang day ,
as should not care for hoarding in a chest . "
the werkes of entaile he cowthe
talent is a very common family - trait ; genius belongs rather to
your face is practised when i spell the lines ,
nor the heroes chant their legends ,
and , like the bird , thou ' lt calmly rest ,
the cates that wit and science bring ,
they should ask their liege lords for a smile and a nod ,
thank god , your child - heart knew not how to miss
shall cease to follow , and the lambs to fly :
as sche was noght in al the toun .
many must love you , but i love you best . '
power of departing thence took from them all .
but hark , what shouts , what gath'ring crowds rejoice !
seen through the leafless wood .   his slanting ray
i would have rather felt you round my throat ,
' i 'll go , my chief , i 'm ready ;
whence , they tell us , is hopeless all returning .
they fled to bliss or woe !
stalwart and stately . a stout wave - walker
let 's live merrily , and thus
the heavenly , fair , aswins ,
is flitting from yonder high spray ;
is healed , my soul untrammelled in my breast .   all our injuries
might foil the poisonous snare ,
it with caution and with care ,
and so departed too .
that threaten the profane;--a pillared shade ,
father . my dwelling is being devoured and my fat lands are
but once in a way they 're caught ; one feels
had hilt and pommel gilded in his house .
nay , on my breast thou must
thy branches ne'er remember
but a silver nutmeg , and a golden pear .
to itself it may be ) god 's dread office and right
and wrinkled and cold .
but fortune even more than valour needs ,
and of these same thare is a few
not so : a buck was then a week 's repast ,
to the researches of later sinologues , many of his conclusions ,
their vigil begin to keep ;
good lost weighs more in grief , than gain'd , in joy .
like a peevish , crabbed man in a freak of good humor ,
their false companion drowses
i have a rendezvous with death . . .
and almost a year to creep back into strength ,
the might of the merciless storm .
hang up poor nyky for a friendly rape ?
yet they seem choicer than your sons of facts ,
all is not heaven 's while abelard has part ;
in which majestic measure well thou know'st ,
dalrymple , seely wight , sore dupe of t'other tew .
almighty god , me grant ;
not honey , not the south ,
his hopes to chaos led ,
and as unto mine eyes it grew more fair ,
blushing and beardless ; and yet ne'ertheless
' twas observed too ( you know how the gossips will talk , )
( ll . 1217 - 1224 ) then methuselah held sway among his kinsmen , and
come in a vision to me ,
one of them slides a gold coin in her stocking ;
that were as a remembered face
as a refuge in her trouble .
above the vulgar flight of low desire ?
o day of consummation ! mark supreme
smooth is the beach , save where some ebbing wave
a blue - eyed , self - assertive mite--
one draws the shaft : one brings again
they slaughter'd him ! then first in vain his words
yet their more righteous contempt never for one instant
here utter aught too dark or high ?
his armor laid and long unused shield ,
unchang'd did mourn those monstrous harms .
think , if clear the throstle sing ,
these arrows and the mighty bow .
victims slay they here ,
and down pure valleys , till it reached a shore
feverish and faint ; her beauteous verdure dies ;
and shrink not from the tyranny to come ?
splendidam verâ sine luce gazam ,
to seize each turn of fortune 's wheel ,
the past,--the student 's soul can find ;
abode without , albeit mighty men .
pleased looks around the delicate repast--
with my nets you never help me !
ardua dum metuunt amittunt vera viai .
succeeded when he turns an imitator ; for the following are
as if their tops had feebly given
to give him leave to toil ;
and spring her banners first advanced .
with it i vanquished poitou and maine ,
the peasant turns him to his lowly fare ,
the scene of those stern ages ! what is there ?
we come !
up ! and the dusky race
around was bountiful and friendly fair .
young jan borel , he answered naught ,
mingled together ,
handle fitted firmly on to it . she also gave him a sharp adze ,
a false course for the world , and for ourselves , false powers .
' gentleman once , ' say his mates with pride ;
a diadem woven with rue .
the big bright moon hung high and round ,
and forests of all fragrant trees
home he went to his garret bare ,
spanning the wave of burnished blue ,
calls us to penance ? more destroy'd then thus
waumblin ' aff a bodie 's knee like a vera eel ,
and of saracen drinks at " the saracen 's head . "
i mark ; but , who thou art , am still to seek ;
in his hand a rod of copper ,
and where the breastplate , doubled , check'd its force .
when man , imparadised , conversed with god .
i can ' member as a youngster ,
but laugh along the way .
back in a fairy dream to smile
when light rose , earthquake - shod ,
sardine - tin ? "
rain may keep raining , and others go roam ,
each draught a future bud of spring ;
and not deny him . then before my eyes
there 's taypots there ,
on the billows fall and rise .
the blowing of a blithesome horn ,
can dance as baby does to me .
ance the flower amang them a ' .
and hateth evil , hath reprov'd as unworthy :
that will never exult in its sports again ;
too quick for groan or sigh ,
behold and marvel ! see and comprehend !
and beauty lightens through the thin disguise .
the furious prince tancredi from that fray
the monarch may forget the crown
the night to day .   o heart that yearns
and forward bends his head ,
and the advancing day consumes the shadows ,
and death the while -
to the achaean host and tell neptune to leave off fighting and go
opposed to tariff , _ ib . _
and they brought him the stuff
algeina men moi kai legein estin tade
the lords of ocean 's watery farms ,
and blood and wine were on his hands
he turns the hinges of the heavy gate
how he , who was in form of god above ,
vierte en tu cáliz de amor?--
the power and glory of a monarch 's name ;
as of birds of prey contending ,
upon a shore of sunburned sands , the hour
are wilder still -- is this the bark ,
but swifter than my fingers pushed their plan ,
craig 's pony was first , i was third ,
of cursyde tunges syns none can them asswage
even made trial of the crags of the cyclops . come , call your
and all the ladies swim through tears
into gulfs avernian .
but he paid no heed unto me--
thee singing on a spray of branching beech ,
with her five cities then they left cyrene ,
of the noblest land upon earth ;
content is not the pathway to great deeds .
away ! my unbelieving fear !
and drift his ice away .
countless are the old mustapha ’s treasures :
story stopped , and we then attended only unto them . i did not
a hole to kennel in -- oh , one 's all right . . .
when jason they beheld a ploughman made !
then to their vessels , through the gloomy shades ,
still upon her sunless soul
when tulips bloom in union square ,
between the jaw and ear the javelin went ;
and then he shuts both eye at last ,
and mockery of hope . " seest thou them now ? "
where the quick cloud - shadows trail ,
thus addresses wainamoinen :
with many a frisk abroad , and , blaring oft ,
every tie , so i feel in my heart , by love is unloosened
' stranger , forasmuch as thou seemest no evil man nor
into their net made pleasant by the baits
in other days , to whom my heart was led
save that which i feel with the maid of my heart .
the things we feel exactly as do we .
and the only fire i know is kindled by wine .
free with the heifers through the mounded grove ,
from charm to charm , where every floweret 's hue
" and the answer ? "
wait not to find thy slippers ,
i must be getting back to breakfast now . "
odors endeared ; down avenues in bloom
with a furtive ear , if i strive to speak ,
and things are not what they seem .
in her hands , all sleek and dripping ,
her blaze of beauty , even in death admired ,
of their ' broidered garments up and down
and directly felt at home here .
" arline ! " he tosses back his sunny hair ,
she nestles like a dove ;
as the dew on the flowers at eve ,
to _ keep _ it mine ! ... you 'll see !
then blooms each thing , then maids dance in a ring ,
though pyte wolde spare , iustyce wyll nat so
have wholly relieved himself of his testimony . i confess to
echoes of love 's house
he the handsome kaukomieli ,
makes this alarum in the elements ,
cold to the world thou art ;
she had mickle to thole , she had mickle to learn ,
time never did assuage ;
valiant as mars , meriones drew near ,
listened and was glad at heart , and likewise did the
that scrape the sky , their only tenant
_ martial _ ( mär ´ shal ) . military ; warlike ; brave .
i think of thee who art the death of parting ;
( the only mecaenas i 've ever had yet ) ,
that they sought unto
nor ruin waste thy cheerless nation ;
quick aloft the huge bird bears him ,
wherein more numerous the people dwelt ,
some , lured by vice , indulge the low desire ;
whereon i straight perceiv'd our passage lay .
mirage - like before my gaze
if we shall rescue him , or must he die ,
i doubted not you did prepare
ne scholde thurgh no tirannie
to be fit resting - place for one not soon forgot .
on the bloody battle - field ,
is moved by undreamed forces still ;
to camelot this,--the other to your grave !
and then the broad face of the sun
how they follow in a flock ,
where two - score officers crowned the golden sea
ne yit for vertu ne for grace ,
his lexicons and grammars ;
as elenor murray , bernard , even kings .
in a pompado ' style , is waitin ' yet ,
and direst form of bondage that
just as if he were a pie .
and girt himself in haste to lay
rose the thin throng of ghosts .
' tis told how shepherd pan found ways to move
vicinity of henna ; though some writers say that it took place in
an ' monie ithers ,
to make of thilke werre an ende ,
the nature of mind and energy of soul ,
where happy fridthjof is standing now .
canine and hard in aspect though he be ,
loses himself in the fair .
waiting since the days of childhood ,
i bridled him and saddled him ,
and lilith paled ,
i want to have a sword and gun
she 's taen her mantle her about ,
the traditional education of the hindu or the sûfî contemplative :
up to the altar of the miracle .
comest thou , escaped thy prison ? and , transformed ,
in robe and armour of resplendent sheen ,
and he looked like a peddler just opening his pack .
" while yet the choice is thine ! "
tol ' me in the evenin ' ,
or how could one that is a king
with sigh and groan ,
and up in agned - cathregonion too ,
granite rock and falling snow ,
whatever a man of the sons of men
ah me !   when shall i marry me ?
wheel back your guns , your howitzers melt ,
or when the pale monk , with his folded hands
shrilly the yellow man sings :
gernier 's right hand she from his arm divided ,
for even as beatrix dante 's wreath did bind ,
an aged rampire , with huge ruines heapt ,
that reddening brow!--too well i know ,
and portia 's dignified consent ,
i looked away
der real roman way . "
watching the last day , robed in empire , die
e'ls auzeletz esperdutz ,
and now , as by bally 's castle i stand ,
so that sche coevereth ate laste ;
" proteus , thou knowest , of thine own heart thou knowest ;
from harrison 's down to the park !
yet nearer to her spirit 's hold :
i trundled my hoop till i had to stop ,
“ i have brought , such as they are ,
" good neighbours all ,
and said , " admetus , now rejoice again ,
as slow mists parted over valmy fell ,
iambe pinnis alitum uelocior ,
of his triumphant constancy and love .
and above , below , and on every side ,
were lifted far from that scene
his runnel song , that skyey roundelay .
" so he boils the water , and takes the salt
heart of mid - lothian . 2 vols .
that feature which the human face embosses ,
and it was nothing more .
" persist not to provoke me , " said wolfhart , " or full soon
and then the old man shook his head ,
si tu , dux meus , ipse jaces , spes ulla salutis ?
and wealthy corinth , and cleone fair ,
it is the 27th of august and the british have landed ,
of thespian temples extant in the west .
and thou betwixt them both wilt be a slave .
noscit humi pedibus vestigia pressa bisulcis;--
on the bridge of scarlet color ,
hans sachs with vast delight he read ,
and i 've been in the poultry business long enough to
up to thee , to their sachem , who towerest
whispered in star and in flower ; a spirit ,
the points of her young eagle 's eyes .
as stately seem'st , but lovelier far
thou shalt give back their earldom to thy kin .
clear and gentle stream !
against our foes , on this contended plain . "
clothed in language very kind ,
that in achaia 's fleet his sons survive ,
and that thou mayst wipe out more willingly
the dead are wise , for they alone can see
but since we dwell here in the crowded way ,
who can not in their various incomes share ,
and a white hand opens its gate to me--
have parasols , and fans , and rings ,
he brought them water pure ,
" no indeed , i will not touch it ! "
whom answer'd thus ulysses , stout of heart :
or where your sad and gentle reveries pass
driving along in his new goat cart ,
when two pretty brown eyes are near .
all these , o king , must sink to hell ,
not by what path , turned me round , and all chilled drew me close
like the modern wise women of the lapps . the companions of
now land , now sea and shores with forest crowned ,
_ the heavenly dame . _ ] arundhati , wife of one of the seven saints .
thou who thine atoning grace
to dramas dark and lyrics debonair ,
but what avails it me , whose limbs are tied ?
weep great rivers from thine eyelids ;
lies backward to the chatelet ! "
“ o monkey stranger be consoled :
to the grim head who claims our services ?
or the worse noises of the lawyers ' bar .
i am not a bride unworthy ,
' oh boy -- that was not fair !
that had been opening , more and more ,
mr . charles collins and mrs . elizabeth cardiff , 14th april , 1696 .
as here hath been displayed :
before they get through with the fun ,
and then what a wail would sweep after ,
with chains about their necks .
in a fine jealousy , with words like these--
the exile is at home !
you ne'er departed from .
" for why , " she cries , " sit still and weep ,
when ruth was left half desolate
we were exiled beyond the pale
a king whilom was yong and wys ,
he presents his own simple experience and emotions , uncoloured by
holds yonder dreaming sea suspense ,
that always thrills me with a noble sound ,
rewarded . ]
and bring the world and beautie into dread :
sat thora , the fairest of women .
this quatrain is translated from c. 127 .
he speaks , and bends to unknown arts his skill ,
unless thou cuts thy stick ,
hail to the chief who in triumph advances !
the brighter for the second birth !
upon gradasso , deems no danger nigh .
with no hoarse dissonance to stir the deep
and faith and fate
three of us aboard in the basket on the lea .
" how contrary desires each way constrain thee ,
----_tres præmia primi
like racking engines !
but now how sweet , how doubly sweet to hold
or bows of cupid ready
ticks with reverberant coil and tolls the hour :
some enemy of ours ? the heart beats not ,
sweet as nectar , which is poured
his servants be ,
then heaven and earth renewed shall be made pure
all shvear de law forbid dis crime , py shings und cerdain sure ;
went out into the world beyond the wood .
an explanation .
she having made the king of circassy
" the third was helmet - bearer--
and love and music soften savage hearts .
as a poacher stands confest ,
  he would be restrained against his nature , as water prevented
by and struck the blow ; and the axe severed the tendons of
while the old men sit and tell us war it is a
happy are men when they have learned to prize
offend thee , o thou wicked one ,
till truth the fulness of its ray restores ,
midst flowers and fields hearing what nature says .
the noise , of which thei were in doute ,
sobre mi pobre tumba abandonada
clad in blue silk and bright embroidery
grain ' means primarily to colour with the scarlet or purple dye
a newfoundland dog was at hand--
“ doff the red silk and don the white ,
were busked out in aprons clean ,
who should have been a king , and would have been ,
though the rich dews of fortune
i hardly knew one face .
which yet we do sustain .
these are his guards , with other thousands twenty .
love god ! thy neighbor love ! for , see ,
pleasure from the knickerbocker club . there is a clergyman from
long we refrain'd ourselves , submitted long ,
tenth or ten thousandth , breaks the chain alike .
his countenance , as the morning - star that guides
no more he said , and i my speech resum'd :
atque inter cineres ditis pallentia regna ,
at god 's forges incandescent
he wrought on me with his cunning , and took me with him
will _ nobody _ answer this bell ?
and pallid , eager faces bent
the longer may it dearer be ;
allas ! what is this wonder maladye ?
v. 102 .   in bologna the low artisan . ]   one who had been a
of light the moon brought , white as frost .
the budding flowers , peeped forth the nest ,
in lucian 's visionary sheaves ,
as over the rocks she trails her locks ,
the appellation of that star , which views ,
fighting the devil in other men 's fields !
if these delights thy mind may move ,
and the long days had come round , my men called me apart and
from the gray sire , whose trembling hand
his family , that wo nt to trace his path ,
glitter , an empress , in her blazonry
afterwards bore it , deemed that not to spell ,
loosely together , the edges close ,
my window wailing : now a little child
while young sid kissop thrashed the pup ,
the sulphurous floods with lessened fury glow ,
" ach ! ich bin kalt ! "
and got a strength in taking wenner 's strength .
and cross the unpermitted ferry 's flow ,
' neath our feet broke the brittle , bright stubble like chaff ;
scythe meets scythe .
yet if some great new " rebel " in his pride
and thought likewise to bind him , / as the king yestreen ,
or in some other dismal place , who knows
but more probably the meaning is that the wolf 's bite gave
and dizzy height of torture ,
not for the fortunes at your fair feet hurled .
lo -- you were with me in the darkened room .
yet pity shone transparent through the same .
and fall to arms , and gainsay us a tide - washed strip of strand .
since words would fail to tell thee of my state .
swarms the stinging fly , the ahmo ,
scarce rocks a spray beneath .
whereto the suns are shade ?
a power of butterfly must be
and lingering pause and lightly tread ;
_ gow ( setting down the body ) _ . heark , you unsanctified
and waxen strong their song was day .
too - silly shifts of maids that mask as men
but one brief summer , on thy path ,
it matters much .
but none will gather them the fruits
to the valley where i left , ' neath skies of truth ,
and allan set him down , and mary said :
as she entered the house .
_ entband beadurunen _
that apple of the briar - scent ,
" ' ere , kid , drink this , " she sez , an ' smiles at me .
_ cho._--for they both forgot their manners and the crew was bound
_ " lead us _ ( we cried ) _ to war against
the oaks forgot their pondering ,
gilding the net wherein his soul was caught
and shut the chamber up , close , hush'd and still ,
like mirage mocking in some waste afar ,
within a well two buckets lie ,
what you do n't give , he steals .
no poem in any tongue is more informed with rhythmic life than
laugh i at fear , knowing thee near,--
i saw , within that torch of jove , the sparkling of the love which
but down at evening under the stars and the branches
i feel too uneasy at the contrasts i behold ,
which dip their foot in the seas
remember now the fears that moved you then ,
i did not go out for a week , for i had to take precautions for my
take your bow and feather the doe
we strike them bounding scared away ,
come , ye hundred ocean - spearmen ,
_ faust _ . how the mad tempest sweeps the air !
lone wandering , but not lost .
or is it good as others are , and be their eyes in fault ?
with strength , though superior , their purpose should gain .
it stands , at the end of a little lane ,
amang the braes o ' gallowa ' .
to honour 's coat no drop adheres:--
thro ' the half - open portal glowing ,
and in some soft and sunny solitude
but neither faint nor swoon .
i 'd range its fair borders , and plunge in its flood ,
with tassels and embroideries ,
" suppose no weapon can thy valor 's pride
they had n't any feet .
god have mercy !
in heightened melody the notes of praise
upon a simmer 's day ,
who are ye , villains ? lying
" i with such words and such - like words was plied ,
was then young , and now i am old ; still i can go with my knights
how proud an air i used to wear !
more affectionately inclined .
in rainfall at morning and dewfall at night .
he rises , all his floods to pour ,
in words as affable and polished as yours , mister ,
fresh tribute to his father ’s shade .
tantam convenientam . ad quod respondeo , quod passus vere est
hail to thee , far above the rest
" oh , " she said , feeling as if she were speaking in a dream , " is
but let us tranquillise our minds ,
through a little roof of glass ;
so , fill your flashing goblets high,--
no single brute his fellow leads .
theodora was by other thoughts possest ,
yes ! ireland shall be free ,
down on her infant mary gazed ;
who made you for me , let me find you , love you ! "
" jove made his leg and kiss'd the dame ,
from the soft wing of vernal breezes shed ,
and sweet amid these wilds , bright dewy bells
she , my white rose , dropping off
the dawn arise , the daylight flee ,
the lang lad they ca ' jumpin ' john
a voice of trouble the stillness shook .
entertained by the people on the subject , although _ practically _ ,
be evermore fulfilled in me ,
with _ that _ thro ' clouds above we soar ;
as one of which doth tarquin lie revolving
beyond the atlantic , but it contained the germs of future
on mosque and tomb , and white - walled shore ,
fear for the dearer one her death bereaves ;
till thou canst not hear the cow - bells ,
warn'd by the seer , to her offended name
my thoughts wo nt to roam , from shade onward to shade ,
when they had sail'd their vessel for a moon ,
and the voice that was calmer than silence said ,
he spoke to his wife in the door , ' let me see ,
and the oil of the olive
how that at ivel - chester jail
through all the grief and strife ,
were mame and murphy , diked to suit the part ,
' come , come , come , birds of the air ,
said a third one : " thee my musket ,
save in _ sathanas apage _ !
i 'll be chief mourner .
the scene is at his castle , altaforte . " papiols " is his jongleur .
who bought with the nation 's life
in the pale indian 's lock'd and grim repose .
after summer merrily :
look then how lofty and how huge in breadth
you bind below your breast ;
pained with her mighty hum the calm , blue heaven .
slouen alle at a slyp þat serued þer - i{n}ne ,
for many days no woman hath gone by ,
which massy cyamum for many a mile
where dark cold - hearted sceptics , creeping , pore
from his place of ambush came he ,
they stick to oil and watchman still:--
his love of china , fairy lore ,
the midst of porticos , processions , and cavalcades , abbes turn'd
y emplazándose , se para ,
the righteous wrath of his relations .
" when other lips and other eyes
burning upon his music .   he stopped short .
and their untimely fate lament in vain ;
and hosts , with moon - shaped shields , exulting hail the war .
" success " was his countersign ,
in troubled tide ; and to marphisa bold ,
la lyre francaise . selected and arranged with notes by g. masson .
just little jacqueline , lucette and i ;
and i am irish , too :
‘ litell john , go loke , ’ sayde robyn ,
in fiery tongues at pentecost ,
and prize was sansonnet 's ; since from the fray
here sank it gently to the ground once more ,
their chairs all round are ranged ;
to find the softness of thy lady 's breast ;
when you need rest .   here i escape from rome
“ maskelles , ” q{uod } þat myry quene ,
mould'ring and hast'ning to decay ;
deitie for thee , when fate will not permit .
to my lost soul -- whom yet its thirst
but is another's!--will god let it be ?
there among the prairie lilies ,
eve after eve ; and still
and , arming first himself , furnish'd with arms
that sent him south so goodly a knight .
crowd all your wicker arcs with the meadow - lilies ;
i 'll can brag o ' the bonniest lassie
their timid young brood .
fast ór they in clammyish lashtender combs creep
“ for in the contest , all the power i boast
if aught of sin there be , ' tis mine . myself i give
bill brown and tom dawes his mate ,
ist das herz geleert , ist das herz geleert ,
thy certain voice we hear :
looked his last upon her beauty ,
as the lute 's music on the lumpish ass .
ille refert : ' laetare , parens ; inmane tropaeum
by b. m. bower . 12mo , cloth . illustrations by russell . $ 1.50 .
above his fellows , with monarchal pride
we used to fear the lonely road
thy warm lips wet
and the footpath to the forest .
yonder the dusty whirlwind flies ;
in front of us appeared so truthfully
ovid recounts these circumstances in the eighth book of the
coloured kisses ,
and sche sori for everemo .
assent , and you are sane ;
and snapp'd his chariot yoke ; the mares , releas'd ,
to the dead in a soldier 's grave .
this was what minerva was already eager to bring about , so down
the carven rose with its petals uncurled ,
but ocean ’s god , whose earthquakes rock the ground .
she smiled her answer :
nor ever any knoty problemme sherked .
to the light above the water .
the curling waters round the galleys roar .
say then , by heav'n , what blasts ye thus ?   the whilst
perhaps some friend of twenty years still lingers there to raise
we as her handmaids were appointed her .
crossing the multi - coloured land ,
when hunger or a wolf removes life and sorrow together
and daily bread is daily earned ;
like cheeses ,
yielded to - day by fashion , learning , wealth ,
and even among these rude ones ;
the lavish violet 's odors shed
speechless i stood , as stricken into stone ;
her glorious eyes , proclaimed the queen .
and their tails were always waving ,
to caves the sleeping maid .
and with bowed head she stood awhile before
pray first to juno , and on bended knee
beneath the benediction of his love .
why , they of nature feel distaste
worsted , and made a prisoner in the fight .
our blood to spill ?
shall i feel!--god forbid it in me !
beneath the ring of each far - sighted blow :
guide its course . ]
from our lord 's time .   and when king arthur made
misgiving .
no number is there to the slain or end .
to ask consent , i leave the olympian bower ;
the offering to that heavenly sire ,
“ more to remove thy doubts , so may the god
the vessel ran ; she took the happy land
blood has dyed the sutlej 's waves
a breath 's space longer on this hither hand
the giant - carcas'd whales at distance stray .
tossed out the pack to michael , whistling low ,
and ' tis a shocking sight
the guests were loud , the ale was strong ,
the gems within his boot he pent .
o lord almighty , thou whose hands
grant me , o lord , a sunny mind ,
that consecrated dust doth lave ,
tu'lsi ( _ ocymum_).--the indian basil , of which there are several
with mighty thoughts his works abound ,
two souls , alas ! are lodged in my wild breast ,
on truth 's broad sun may root a gaze
and can thy bosom ,
on mee , mee onely , as the sourse and spring
the tall and gracious messengers he sent .
en el grande aparato de sus naves ,
the sun would have gone down upon their mourning had not achilles
outflew the shaft , but with the shaft , this charm ,
the love for him , that held me , it eclips'd
the smiles , that follow shine more brightly .
there was a painful change , that nigh expelled
" hiccup!--hiccup!--good god ! how do you manage ? "
till orford rose , and told of rhiming peers ,
her nose look lak a kittle spout ;
all pair'd , and each pair built a nest .
and there with the rest are the lads that will never be old .
the croaking tenant of the marshy pool .
dollar , its blood to the last drop , having spent
of each township , town , and village in the radius of the act .
with spots of gold and purple , azure and green :
he grins , and opens wide his greedy jaws ;
the difficulties which beset him round ,
a hermit , nursed on woodland fare , —
of loue procedeth : and drawe from it your mynde
i ne'er have seen the painting .
let cry through every kingdom of the kings:--
diana in her silver beams doth rove ;
are from the mother shed ,
when lincoln died !
the shepherd of the people , taller she made him than before
spite o ' tauntin ' , flauntin ' , flingin ' ,
don juan , when the midnight hour of pillows
of love , and hadde a goodly chiere ,
still their name survives !
but all the fair one asks beside
wi meikle goud and white money ,
utter'd reproaches , scandal , and abuse ,
love that can part with all but its own worth ,
adorned with gems and golden net .
good from bad , defeat from victory ,
and inland , wild with warning ,
his bannet and feather , he 's waving high ,
where the days are dreaming always ;
then back to their shipping they flew like the wind ,
but take one , tho ' i loathe to give it thee ,
and there our passage lay athwart the foss .
challenger . ajax came up bearing his shield in front of him like
to choose among them ?
as to the lowest ice may i descend ! "
still from yon lattice stream'd the unwelcome light--
diamonding the wonder - light .
" life 's cares they are comforts"--a maxim laid down
but hides and shrouds
the worth that worthiness should move
ah , wert thou borne for this ? only to call
the blissful manners of the age of gold .
the mystic being of old stories sleeps ,
here , and elsewhere , that old rock toppled down .
invention can . if he lost any credit of design , he augmented his
and a gallant cock shall be
wandered to seek some moonlight seat
this , this , o friar , was a deadly flaw ,
scarce know pause or diminution ,
in the place my art foretold
his mouth the yawning door - way , and a cloud across the night
but try not thither to move my mind ;
my tears fall as i think thereof .
what was it that i heard ,
and they picked the locks of his palace - gate ,
about wine -- not for wine .
i saw the moonlight lying large and calm
consoled him in his wild despair ,
and much as wine has play'd the infidel ,
and set off briskly for so slow a thing ,
( a very intelligent man , by the way ) ,
pass to the farther world . for none
be infinitely good , and of his good
that gasps for breath ;
in a hopeless hour ,
all nature shook convulsed with dread ,
moving through the dew , moving through the dew ,
never grows weary .   but how different is it
it may be they shall give me greater ease
might live content , and , free from noise and brawls ,
up to her chamber window
or if it rage too madly in its bed ,
beauty no other thing is than a beam
their balmy odours o'er eternal snow ;
and sweeps from mountain - crest to coast ,
lauro cinge volens , melpomene , comam .
" then yudhishthira answered : ' yea , one thing .
gleams out like some glad angel 's crown ,
while singing solemnly and low
perhaps lest men should think the gods will dwell
the foldings of his mantle green :
and by whose hearthstones thou wert blest .
well could he letten blood , and clip , and shave ,
methinks my zeal to valentine is cold ,
and then my boy -- as he growed to be
when cheerfulness , a nymph of healthiest hue ,
what yet hath been my fortune , / never did i hear
to whom more welcome had been forage , stall ,
still told their weary tale unto their loves ,
i saw a thistle in the castle courtyard ,
his midnight orisons he told ,
together .   rede i can ] counsel i know .   part with ] share
and sweet red splendid kissing mouth ?
but anna sees not how she veiled her death with new - found rite ,
and a diligent hand
and the fierce dashing waves are heard on ayr ’s old craggy shore ,
behold with music 's many - stringed charms
the cavern entered next ; but first he took
happy insect ! happy thou ,
and quaff it to the prophets of our age ;
i will have my heart 's desire , and do as the high gods would . '
ought of my sisters , girt in huntress wise
it is not with laughter that i
skims low adown upon the wing the sea - plain 's face anigh ,
whoever turns the helm to come to port )
some with smiling eyes , and some
his death and victory ,
oh , they sailed into bethlehem
there 's peace in the parting day ,
share my harvest and my home . "
from cape breton far as the mexic bay ,
that owther schal he deie or i
well may they speak !   that francis , that first time ,
i 've learned owl - eology .
than that enduring and strong anguish bred ,
light to gaily
ah , constantine ! to how much ill gave birth ,
there lives my blithesome mountain maid ,
adrastus : hyperesia , and the heights
company ; and though he was very capable of a judicious choice , he
like nuggets in a pan ;
more proudly on these wreaths to - day ,
she gives the reins a twirl.--
so spake the seraph abdiel , faithful found
to bite a bad monkey whenever he steals .
then heav'n and earth renewd shall be made pure
weary of everything on earth
at gloamin - shot , it was i wot ,
from whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow
strangle - hold -- an ungentle embrace in wrestling .
i used to dream in all these years
( which will come over things ) , beats love or liquor ,
lay on a thymy bank , and viewed
the very earth about caught fire ,
the crystals of the freezing air ,
and he kissed her twice and thrice , for that look within her eyes
sunk in the calmness of elysian rest .
for thy bad life doth blame to me pertain ? '
the combless seas were lumping into swell ;
' neath every bud , or blossom gay ,
so stood aghast the sinner when he rose .
thought with reason ;
we make the very coins . besides , that part
literature , for poetry is a quality of all the arts including
but ye perversely to religion strain
i am no more one more amid the throng :
of   storms    o'erbear
and yet bob always got ahead ;
sink thou down uvantolainen ,
and braying it rump wi ’ the end o ’ yor flail ;
of that old patriarch deal with other men ?
what say the laws of england ?
of drums he raced along the street ,
to gratify a woman ’s spite ?
so mournful that it seemed the cry of one
whence we conclude from thy translated song ,
ah ! what a scene torments the eye :
her paths are disillusion and decay ,
so i have lost you . when the utter ache
with a lizard basking by me ,
in the wild heart of that eclipse ,
the majesty that shuts his burning eye ;
there 's joy in the bright blooming feature ,
_ lucky , a _ , an old woman .
the early year hath re - inspir'd ,
saw destruction flying over ,
it put my resolution to the rack ,
heaven foregoes its blessings , if it holds not thee ,
as a proud and stately mast , still
piled high with glistering barbel , freshly - caught ;
brought storm and tempest on its wing .
still strikes our foes with wonder and dismay ;
and in masses huge and heavy
dictionary . it occurs again in no . 478 .
and there till dusk i 'd sit and think
in a circus wagon and play on it ?
with fairy fingers ye invest
blushing , she turned her from the king ,
or the stricken eagle soar .
pause but one moment in your brief career ,
now wakes some sorrowing mother 's prayer ;
while a fresh , favouring wind , filling the sails , drove us on .
and the shadows halt at the door .
she doesna need -- she 's fever proof--
slanting on black walls .
the philomel , her fire - ship , closed ,
wine , wafer , love , hope , truth , unlimited ,
and when nature cut off this appendage behind ,
of that soul - wasting absence of his son ,
with anchors flexed as lissome withe ;
so . turn your face as you did before.--
another zeus gives good and evil , for to him all things are
( so jove decreed ! ) at length the greeks obtain
glides on , a vessel swift ;
in a world as hard and gray as stone--
" forevermore , forevermore ,
and you ca n't get wine at a p.s.a . , or chapel , or eisteddfod ,
once its service done ?
amazed they cry , " what spell is this ,
oh , sing aloud mt . zion 's songs ,
i fed you with the milk of every muse ;
" no mother 's care
than if you follow with unwilling feet .
whereon i said : ' o master , i entreat ,
mother said , " come home at five ! "
changed the rude tents ' ever - wandering home .
gars ony dress look weel . '
nor tell to various people various things ,
of my great offices still laid aside
that bore white lilies seven ;
and the playing of ball - buffetting with saxon heads .
her pulses beat , her foot was fleet , her fear was as a spur ;
impatient , yearns for thee ,
reflections did his mind engage
to be swolȝed swyftly wyth þe swart erþe ,
or would to mercy , or to wrath incline--
but ere night came , that scene of fine sights turn'd
and so a peace they make .
" uplift it ! " said northumberland--
grasped the sharpened sword he carried ,
they have a bowl and bubbles ,
" how about dr . foster ? "
here 's to the health of the prince , god bless him !
the ship drove fast , loud roared the blast ,
your christmas present , child . "
and of cake a slight hunch ,
that i loved her,--would incline
to sarpedon , not hennes but a myle .
thus the hoarse tenants of the sylvan lake ,
through three mountain glens be sang them ,
from the log dripped down the nectar .
i have prayed long beside the tomb
each to his work , his wage at evening bell
the bidding of their lord .
from his heart his only daughter .
there 's not a thing but love can make
_ her _ locks were yellow as gold :
lifting defiance to the powers of spain .
with rows of ivory inly .
be mine the better task to find
make the ever - yielding music of my soul .
say , who is richer than i ?
que juno te ofreció , tu ninfa bella !
you may not see me there , but something else
they leave marbris , they leave behind marbrus ,
" i find thee worthy ; do this deed for me " ?
somewhere or other we 've heard snuff
it would take you many summers
that tell too well the thoughts that hidden lie .
and deliberately climbing up ,
how long the lane , how soon ' tis past ,
religion lay the way she went ;
my ship . '
to ky{n}g & quene by cortaysye . ”
with lifted eyes , his ear to her he lent ;
the cornfield stretched a tender green
when thou visitest thy sister
slipped a kiss to ' er , ' n ' i wings me flight
of a blest people.--i have told thee truth .
teach us delight in simple things ,
which the wild sea - murmur fills ,
a ghost who 's shut in front from wine ,
runs with a swifter current as it nears
drake 's gift . she scarce could see her name , writ broad
he roam'd alone the aleian field , exiled ,
so then leave me alone ! i shall follow the footpath that crosses
their deep enchanting undertone .
and though no saint on earth , d'ye think --
hold carnival , and vice walks to and fro .
she , all the maiden modesty 's surprise
streamers o'er him shook and shifted ,
but , ah ! then comes his sorest spell
had placed that bell on the inchcape rock ;
with the hope of my heart .
are tinted with gold and red ;
the blackbird 's song at even - tide ,
" how 's my boy "                sydney dobell
and mantuans by country both of them .
with the dragon - fly on the river .
until doom will i remember
the embryo - heir of empires yet to be ,
the monster roaring to the last ,
sae fam'd in martial story .
stript to his waistcoat , and that not too clean ,
with glorie attributed to the high
but how could she find heart for conquest ?
then up spake john de matha
quaeque solet nigros nox mala ferre metus !
charge fate for our bad luck , ourselves for success ,
to wrap around my head ! "
when all our love breaks into perfect flower
for far beyond , immeasurably far
fell on his back , and wish'd himself good night .
as though you just were we d ? "
the firmament doth shake , & hell so neere
if i tell thee , sweetest ,
hidden with care .
the year is done .
but the alligator was potentator .
and might have left him as she found him
unconscious . perish universal troy
and look upon myself , and curse my fate ;
she blush'd with love and maiden shame ;
had stood the test of mortal enmities
bounded o'er the marsh and heather ,
to shun the voice and eye of praise ,
the notes of her forsaken swain .
the toiler sweating beneath his load ; and the
critics :
boding evil to me and mine ,
and rode amain with brandished sword ,
naught makes us nobler than a noble grief .
lately return'd into our native land ;
you too , ye laurels , and you , ye myrtles , near ,
and summer hid her forehead ,
clean shaven he , of massive mould ,
_ you tread the way to arcady . _
may lend thee light , as thou dost lend to other '
we urged her to lie down and rest , and , following cal 's beckoning
the world is great : the people laugh and talk ,
this telemachus spoke fiercely to ctesippus , " it is a good thing
and the after - sleeping ;
and green the trees luxuriant tresses shoot ,
in glittering , bent , and twisted letters .
untried to which i call ?   to unknown risks
that send no answers back again .
as others with a different name .
wherein his babe - heart joyed long years agone .
' then know , i am going a fair bride to obtain . '
that at the laste certainly they die .
for that church , perchance , may heal and save me . ”
in good order and repair ;
to give my love good - morrow
she watched his return , from the battlement.--
and the wringer ’s wrist wo n’t ache much with the pain
and all , in future times , forgot , and die .
and wafted up to heaven .   it fades away ,
over the earth , then did the eager sons
vanished , and never more was seen !
and thus shall win the lady , whatever thence befall .
the wailful sweetness of the violin
what rage for fame attends both great and small
since reason and all mental gifts are thine ;
should banish the spirit !
_ streek _ , stretched , to stretch .
by which life 's giver mocks a broken heart .
those minstrel halls had slumbered long
who walks alone in contemplation 's ways ?
holy spirit have you in his keeping .
and bore by turns the wholesome cane
her eyes have blessed you .
rang with their unseemly laughter .
when peals of thunder shook low vale and mountain - head .
smiled into her eyes of brown :
between two dates of death , while men were fain
bequeathed , in dying , to our souls by thee--
but harmlesse man is matter of the day ,
and wait ! cried the night and wind and storm,--
at the portals near the rafters ;
for if thou dost not answer my questions three ,
honey breathed throughout the forest ,
and the hoss - fly is a - whettin'-up his forelegs fer biz ,
and the masts were made of gold .
" young lover , i must weep -- such hellish spite
discovers unknown coasts ,
he could not -- durst not . by the skies i plead ,
thus he breached the fence of iron ,
and those love - darting eyes must roll no more .
upon the earth i cast me down
of peace on earth , good - will to men !
for there 's no human life at the full or the dark .
his grace was an enduring , married man ,
after th ' event may e'en a fool be wise . "
triangular tilly went smilingly by ,
  petronius , satyricon , cap . 93 . g.
same as i said when my _ boyhood _ went
eheu , quid hoc est ? en apollo
for of his wo , god woot , she knew ful lyte .
and in far lands folk presaged with blanched lips
nam populus mortale genus ; plebisque caducae
coeli vibrat arenula ,
' twas perhaps the first appearance of the ever - lasting joke
what caused the hemolysis . since you say
yet their impress e'er must linger ,
a timid footstep -- halting , slow ?
in the dark perchance they weep , who have left their work undone .
say heavenly muse , their youthful frays rehearse ;
hark ! ah , the nightingale !
dreamed forwards to long , undimmed ecstasy ,
my crop , content for charlie 's sake .
he adding ,
' e 's the proper kind o ' padre for ten deaths a day .
from her visit in the west ,
" can'st hear , " said one , " the breakers roar ?
and scour the ocean 's borders ,
ah , how swiftly gone is he !
beneath its shade the wayworn find their rest ,
" the king of tripoli was well advised
of cassentin descend down into arno ,
to him thy martyr true , a place accord ;
e di molti altri . " e qui chino la fronte ;
but foreign griefs possess'd not power to chase
and to the little nautilus upon the sand .
to - night she is not with me . i kiss her empty dress .
look how the long volutes of foam unfold
all things to man 's delightful use , the roof
to blend high aims and cunning low ;
he aft has wrought me meikle wae ;
to deprive him of his well - earn’d trophy ,
( but you may guesse the reason )
but the little kite said , " i 'm afraid i 'll fall . "
reckless with youth and the zest to discover
as the young morning breeze that springs
thus with his wings his body he hath brought
but skylarks sang by teston weir ;
on thy lover at this hour , bonnie lassie , o !
a melancholy sound is in the air ,
brothers . let them then all become friends as heretofore , and
the bay , quoth she , is of the victours born ,
how mean you that ? have you of every sort ?
may the waters flood this dwelling ,
and gently rest you in fair maya 's eye ,
there 'll never be peace till jamie comes hame
a daphne and a mary who live in privacy ;
will shake his hoary head , and say , " alas !
thick as a mast the vapour swells its size ,
that ever souls of men in balance set
now the spring is in the town ,
may you die an old maid without pity !
si licet , exstinctas aspiciamque faces !
dark hints , and looked for partners of his wrong :
charitable ; not live this tormented mind
cloister and sat upon it in the form of a swallow .
what grace , what glamour , what wild will ,
( hell , canto i. ) had driven dante back and made him lose hope of
" brother ! " said he , " the hind'rance which once held
yet were we blest together .
my dad and sister keep the farm on still .
for your meek virginities ,
and the little beauty fair annet haes
when shall i be as i have been
your wages run from day to day ,
if good , may i be numbered with the first ,
then flashed the light ; on came the busy hum ;
yea ! dreams all free from earthly taint ,
with thee , and thine , to live and die .
and whirling down , in fierce career ,
found deadly , such was time to thee ;
to right or left , eternal swervin ' ,
in a vision of the night i saw them ,
{ 7b }   stanza lxviii .
and of its opposite .   he next , who follows
aw remember the time when aunt betty an ’ alice
but psyche , uplifting her finger ,
the coffee , sugar , tea , and rice--
" long and lovely are thy days ,
might cast o'er hope and memory ,
a good life is , of course , very well ,
the young -- the fair -- the gay--
met my eyes that fairly froze my blood in terror and affright--
the uplifted arm , the clatter of blows on the helmeted head ,
to point from fading joys of earth ,
they cared not . they dared not ,
uentus agat nubes , quid cogitet umidus auster ,
commend the earliness of his own proficiency to the notice of
which suit her better than themselves ;
in the topmost boughs , is the image fair
a stone was put up and attention it drew .
he scales a cloudy tower ,
never suspected he .
here is a journey among goodly sights ,
the spirit of her voice comes then to roll
and the hush'd waves lie flatted on the main . )
en virginal ayuno
but when ' tis auld it waxeth cauld ,
the roses die , each day fresh flowers are springing ,
our jails and asylums are full to o'erflowing
and stir'st them till they thrill
my bird , that sang , is dead ;
" there is a flower that hears afar
while coiled the dragon closer to the tree ,
and soon that toil shall end ;
i all but hit a sparrow .
corn rigs , an ' barley rigs , & c.
as the glorys of nachur so fare,--
shoulder .
they would say , if ' twas rebecca ,
is it she ?
i sometimes wish that god were back
be weie of supplantacioun
in all her flaunting sunday best ;
and the blue expanse of ocean .
he is not very good ,
themselves all driven before the host of greece .
with strokës great and stronge :
the officers of etzel forthwith bestirr'd them all ,
on !   on !   all hell defying ,
all ebb and flow by the same rhythmic law
and my former life restore me ,
what , now , is the content that finds expression in this form ?
in footing , the stately of stem ;
dry - shod landed hiawatha .
and roam , as north and south winds roam , apart .
float birds of graceful form , and gorgeous plumes ,
one sole eternal godhead , of whose love
santa claus chuckled ; his rosy cheeks fairly beamed joy .
she 'll say -- that mists above the mountains rise ;
where'er they fall , an answering blaze
here is fairy bread to eat .
twisted staff of oak ,
he feeds upon bath mitts .
her fainting strength forsook her ; on her knees
in contact ; and sometimes even a fair stranger 's
mute music soothes my breast -- unuttered harmony ,
along the far , dim , desert route .
say not of me that weakly i declined
was not so fair as he ;
a numerous brigad hasten'd .   as when bands
when the tempests kill the earth 's foul peace ,
the earl of marris men throw them brak ,
the foe , with twice their force ;
but they camp where the grass is good ;
our darling bud uncurled ,
he wends unfollow'd , he must house alone ;
hath pierced , but still you ravening wolf escapes .
whose sacred eye thy tenedos surveys ,
o'er scented balustrade the scented gale
“ sways next to heaven's,--a vast demand i ask;--
that arabs through the realms of space
and hath a tongue wherewith his point to gain ,
to the play of merry maidens ,
that ne'er did wrong to thine or thee .
a feller out the way it does ; but that ai n't music there--
goldsmith 's poetical works .
" election make ,
but we fancy that we -- we only
remembering , what i was erewhile .
the damsels ’ forms for punishment ,
while all confess thee -- as they ought to do--
o'er dazzled ocean , through the night she drew
ends in the milder merit of the heart ;
and helios rose in her eyes ,
you 'll get on without a hitch ,
now the world shaketh , and fear awaketh ,
such thoughts were his , ere long to be fulfilled .
let us recollect our sensations as children . what a distinct and
littered with papers , cups , and greasy plates
i droop exhausted on the briny earth ,
he can build , and once more fire .
or ghosts in the ruddy gloam !
and thou , dost thou bewail mortality ?
column , tower , and dome , and spire ,
then tell me how to woo thee , love ;
less than a god they thought there could not dwell
lacking the countenance of our friends .
and ek to coigne the moneie
which is the daintier bonny belle ;
i 'll wager the rascals a crown
so splendidly vulgar , that no one had ever
and sought it in the likeliest mode
may fall , flit , fly , perch -- crouch in the bowery breast
in the sharpness of her torment ,
that tries to race , i still insist
to rulers of the state ,
then she calls us in .
the while toward us their brows are full of threat ? '
that your eye was as steady as ever ;
dipped its fingers in the juices
would guide the lampe of heauen he then had staid ,
let him attain ,
each other in so firm a grasp
he does , who could achieve .
still pressing on with strong control
to be the first , man 's reverence to inspire ,
and sought his love amid the elysian fields ,
and let pity replace it .   oh , weep for his sorrow--
the good man early to the levee goes ,
his life pegan :
while we were gazing , life and motion took .
the bravest argives there , defying all .
" that you mean to abandon our royal gazette ,
sche made hem blede to the deth
for if the pouer were myn ,
then shall be the brave and wise .
and there the lady views , with wondering eye ,
and tiny mrs . ladybug in polka - dot array .
with different uniforms and drills ,
-- oh , damn !   i know it ! and i know
by machiavel , the waiting maid ;
with trees on either hand .
at such unguarded times disclose ,
chart the ulterior firmament ,
dansava tirsi con l'amata cloride , " & c.
but wave the foliage as it may ,
and all the birds turn back in countermarch ,
out into the yard they wandered ,
eternal father ! may the king perform
sir , an uncommon beauty ! ... i rather should say
next springing up into the chariot 's womb
responsive in each bosom ,
he then bade paeeon heal him , whereon paeeon spread pain - killing
then began to move the sampo ,
that saved she might be ;
he seide alowd , that men it herde ,
' slayer of unarm'd men , here is a chance !
we two had sung , like gladsome birds in may .
ayein his trowthe brak his stevene ? "
the world may hear
its bright colours .
there i met a bonnie lassie ,
at length , o sight of joy!--the gleam of sails
steals in his footsteps , following close , but flames
beyond the dreamy distance of the star,--
but just esteem of present good
there where imatra is rushing . "
though i walk with peace - of - the - heart and rejoice .
to dip my helmet in .
thy arts of building from the bee receive ;
cleave you the woods and pass the plain ,
the bear responded sadly ,
and sable curls , all silvered o'er with white ;
no better quarters could be found
your soul that night may be required of thee .
the high - born prince of wales
when he had said this , with his eyes distorted , he seized again
he lends me every lovely thing ,
ulysses sixth , as jove in council sage .
which the tongs and hammer bears ,
the freest she that ever gazed on glass ;
deep and dormant there .
their corn and oil and wine ,
now , this is just a simple tale to tell the reader how
sing thou of loue , thy straines ( like powerfull charmes )
and for himself , himself did vengeance take .
big , to build .
sarpedon to assail the lofty wall ,
not satin , i wear
exulting , trembling , raging , fainting ,
the race of sodomites were bold in sin , in deeds perverse ,
in the glens among the birch - trees ,
stable , where each chooses a horse . ]
come forth all together ! come old and come young ,
god gives not only corn for need , ii . 191 .
alas ! good - night .   i will not say good - by !
whose little nibbling rustle will embarrass
god - fools , god - drunkards these do call the men
of sempiternal roses , bending , wreath'd
and sadly longed for its return ,
broken only , now and then ,
there 's nothing in heredity . "
o music , lead the way--
hear i , or dream i hear , their distant strain ,
which whilst that enamour'd swain
and the bride a lovely boy straightway .
i will not leave thee in this lower world . "
happy love is come to woo
though to devouring flames a prey , all troy
for the good of the state , for the good of us all ,
and the shamrock doth also with elfin grace
induced her to sit in a holly ;
thus it appereth playne and euydent
both of her beauty , and submissive charms ,
might cost both man and master too -- their places .
the listening leaves divinely stirred ,
and the lantern dimly burning .
still doth the file of hebrew dames proceed .
all that remains of her
sad hearts would bound and smile
when on his altered sense the change is wrought ,
yonder a bright spear , cast out of a sling ,
at first it seemed a prism on the grail ,
now years unnerve him , and his lord is lost !
his daughter then he beckoned ,
but though i had an hunder mair ,
woe will be theirs too deep to brook
that with gladness enlivens my heart
and rural pleasures crown his happiness .
as waits the warrior for a pontiff 's palm ,
the birds had ris'n every morn ,
so i am here , and wait , and know every hour will remove them .
thine the compass that could guide
_ pr . _ ' t is thy part , io , to do these a favor ,
she answered him , " chaste wives to her do pray
the sails flutter out .
who rushed through a field of blue clover ;
which moved his ready tongue such ill to say ;
as the cattle crawl afield beneath the yoke ,
shut when titan goes to bed ,
thereat a little stretching forth my hand ,
" what reminds you , father ? " asked the twins , in chorus .
wherefore of thee if charon should complain ,
whyle they ar yonge in theyr chefe lustynes
bigger than the big - sea - water ,
at best a sacrilegious modesty .
nor look with the morning - like feelings , o river ,
the mind , that ocean where each kind
then he turned his face to the wall and died .
nor shall eudoxus ' year ( 8) excel mine own .
said ' a youth yet unbearded is my love ;
in fields for slaughter ;
_ mahábhárata sabhá - parwan _ , 1105 and 1108 , notice is taken of the
therefore than all the rest i scan thee more . "
glimmered , while racks of stellar lightning shot
it ends in joyful lays .
he wiled me down the sandy lane ;
and a blot on the sky by day ;
and therupon him hath adresced ,
so why should i cruelly cut it short ?
there , charged to him , i gum!--
( alas ! that it so ready should stand ! )
at throat , at breast and flank the warrior laid ;
" god bless the ship , i say .
the eyes that farthest gaze in ecstasy ,
is savage sulla 's pupil .   ' tis for you ,
that shall endure till the links of the universe
go out and find if they have found a man
the day at hand when he must take the road
creed , a safe kind of , 439 .
but all such boys , unless they mend ,
once more , if thou delayest in hot baths ,
die as they dazzle--
yet i march on with measured tread ,
saying : " dearest father , grant me
i heard a song at daybreak ,
thought we knew better than either of them :
" now may the omen be good ! " said one .
there stood the chariot , beaming forth its rays ,
in desert waste or crowded street ,
oberon , what is death ?
_ pund , pund o ' tow _ , pound , pound weight of the refuse of flax .
the angel wrote and vanished . the next night
nor was his name unheard or unador'd
more yet in beauty , than in rank , the queen !
that no fish swim it , nor about it call
chatter and love and hate ,
still to her banner , day by day , are pressing ,
breathe your soft prayer to christ , the child !
hushed are the harmless waters ; lo , the flickering wood above
with laugh that told the lightened heart ,
and a mighty wind had swept the leaves ,
“ so forc'd ; and her own sacred stream despis'd ;
and he that tipples ten is of the nobility .
when all unwares is gone , he inwardly
moreover , she made the wind fair and warm for him , and gladly
here dawn to - day unveiled her magic glass ;
max cursed hilarity which must needs have a mark .
stuck together close as wax.--
in sondry wyses shewed , as i rede ,
which he in winter fed on browse ,
the monarch 's crown , to light the brows ?
of life itself , the ship of ships .
her press enthralled -- her reason mockt again
whence her soul she can not wean,--
and kept them in it , his long wooing her ,
the flowers that please you wreathed about my hair ,
nor all the imperial pride of lofty troy ,
e'en by the vessels ' sterns , the war shall rage .
began to die , o great ruth * for the same !
unto the banners , that do levy war
in narrow room nature 's whole wealth ; yea , more!--
sitting apart upon the topmost crest
grateful he sang , and danced in gladness .
through all the coasts of dark destruction seek
thro ' the bright realms of fame sublime to rise .
within a lordly castle / well known the country o'er ,
us , who interpret right
on windless nights , in the lonely places ,
bitter is life
descended to his arms , eloped in short ,
then shall ye , good companions , / in all your speech agree
and palaces and temples rent ;
" now who shall say he loves me not . "
and lover - like , as love enjoineth me ,
the sons of raghu slain by me . ”
and give it in my hands at eventide :
the summer nights , and shortens winter days .
blew the spark within the fuel into a flame . '
low bent the golden saxifrage ;
trace of the traitor . not troublous seemed
though huge , and in a rock of diamond armd ,
mountains are cleft , and level through the hills
my back toward the window . something shut
but when i knew that thou wast nigh ,
o star of truth down shining
they were the nicest folks beneath the sun ,
he , the young monarch , whom
when all shall own it , but the type
i will not call you men ! why go we not
the window so you can get through
arms ; your pretty , artless words , in their
in full accordance with his own desires .
thee vexe and pay
que en dudas engolfado , hasta tu esfera
* desconortado * , desconhortado , desconsolado .
though weak we are never afraid ;
therefore you echoed man 's undying woe ,
that can lead hell 's phantom - throng .
come warm thee with this cup of ale . "
from her table over - filled ,
ad delubra iuuat caesosque uidere iuuencos ,
there front to front , the midst of all the field ,
when were raked the sea - girt islands ,
human bliss from human pain ;
' young man , a soldier will you be
and pipes for closets all over , and cutting the frames too light .
nor yet by dolphin'd arethuse ;
by all bernhardi 's maxims you were surely bound to win ,
till i heard chapman speak out loud and bold :
she is afraid that she may fail in service to you .
and zeppelins to which i pin my hopes ;
but we must still be seeking ?
take the matter so prepared , and have organs to prepare it
of sovran light .   thenceforward , what i saw ,
the mischievous raven flew laughing away ,
sweet sorcery of the flesh ! a sphinx above thee
and others looked in their pools
perched all around on every tree ,
pray'st thou for mercy on thy mother 's soul ,
the slow palms of my longing ,
narrantur , gorgonum quondam domus , bidui navigatione distantes a
and thus it has been for ages gone--
i am not weary , though i found no rest .
with that faint fragrance fraught ,
but who is he in bower close confin'd ,
not the dragon - fly , kwo - ne - she ,
sit down!--let not my presence trouble you--
sun - flushed , or touch at night the northern star ;
who of antonio thought until
hand in hand we will walk in the sunrise now ,
stoop under faint gleams , thread the shadows , find
the people with his virtues ’ ties ,
two noble steeds lay side by side ,
that sche no lengere wolde drecche ,
to deck our bridal bed .
no nightingale did ever chaunt
light the long and dusky lane ;
we dip the oar , we loose the sail , and driven
you breathe every air that is going ,
with thronging phantoms that round us pressed ,
here we go down , down , downy ;
probably signified the return of light , and the resuscitation
and forth with hire i sih tisbee ,
but you are so constantly changing your appearance that when he
wearisome when indulg'd with no regard
i 've seen me dazed upon a time ,
of the staff as simply quaint and mirth - provoking
the game we had last saturday was sure a corking sight ;
and among whirled leaves
cuckoo , bird , and open ear wells , heart - springs , delight-
for it was his ancient way .
sweet is the moonlight on the tree ,
the fenyl ant the fille ;
blue and cool :
no . the suitors , therefore , make you this answer , that both you
  brothers of the order of santa maria , established in 1261 ,
we 've learnt a little thing or two , an ' we ' ave unlearnt ' eaps ,
or rail at the weight of his crosses
the greedy pigs begin to squeal ,
all borrowed sorrow :
which ( the burgesses voted by common consent )
red of hue , his chlamys burning
and slowly eats his way against the wind ;
his is the gain ; our lot is but to serve ;
a bitter sorrow by the heart him bit ,
and all the long walls shuddered : from the towers
and it calls a boy aloft ;
while aeolus woos your cheeks ,
the frozen billow crested to its fall ;
in reaction ’s final ditch :
my baby smells more sweet to me
the comely aventinus , glorious seed
and when our own time comes,--again
glides the smooth current of domestic joy .
' tis curing sick people by dozens and scores .
-another night , another day . "
the poplar is bright on the hill ,
proud is her leal heart -- modest her nature ;
" but it is still delightful to take out of a great hoard . "
i most believed him æsculapius ' son
unruffling waters re - collect the shape
all the rocks stood well established ;
but the music is lost and the words are gone
thus the star of northland answers :
by the cold candle , bathe and dress .
upon those themes most solemn and most strange ,
love , hope , and joy , fair pleasure 's smiling train ,
john dyer , of whom i have no other account to give than his own
grant then , that from necessity arise
born of rich parentage , and nicely bred ,
quiet grow the alue - waters ,
all are filled with awe and wonder ,
to throw me headlong in the rapid main :
the table is loaded with bread and meats , and the cup - bearer
dere nefer yet vas flower like dis ,
to the forest by the frigid water .
above her head and so forgets her vows--
the king and beggar in the tomb
forget there are any political rings
in glass or horn ?
in losing me , you might yourselves be lost .
in the swamp he sang yet deeper .
--the word you have written , your pictured head--
fools buy things , my dear mr . pierpont morgan ,
that gnomes ' feet are webbed like geese - feet ,
of endless agitation .   here you stand ,
to don his sacrifice and preie ,
there never was knight like the young lochinvar .
lay that earth upon thy heart ,
a young and stalwart chippewa
and yet , i know not if the court permits .
reasonably expect , but to - morrow morning you have to shake your
now he melted them to pity .
how he would take his pleasure once ! '
on kind occasions i may wait ,
have thought , that death so many had despoil'd .
gainst which the pagans ' force and battery bend ,
then thought the queen , ' lo ! they have set her on ,
his habitation high is here , and nigh ,
the crooked way did bending turne againe ,
across the margent of the world i fled
go down betime and rescue earth ,
of daśaratha ’s son , ” they cried ,
hath no aim and no mission but pleasure ;
and civil conflict on the soil of france
to watch the threshers in the mossy barns .
gave the hero every comfort ,
by whom the troubled waves of earthly sound
et sedeo duras ianitor ante fores .
so with cozy toes and hands
and said " i could die for a hand like this ! "
scots mustered a very large force near jedburgh , merely to break
lightnings and mighty thunders ,
even my praise to paint it seems a slight !
thow stant , ordant as sanct , of grant maist wise ,
so high they rose that they were lost to sight ;
seaward they strained their gaze ; for one great fear
and i with sobs did pray--
in fellowship with human - kind ;
exalt thyself to bestow space there for my eyes , which were
sheer the precipice descends ,
raise up the gun -- it stings my brow --
the bulging shore that bosks,--a tinge
this volume in her offspring 's hand ,
here are the things which you require . "
he turns upon them , backward they recoil ,
where they leap the crags in their flight
" sing me a song divine ,
yon politician , famous in debate ,
but with the cowboys of the west
make thou dead faith and love to rise again .
transposition of the authentic modes beginning on the
silence to him no otherwise replied
like a high - born maiden
unfortunate .   the father was unfortunate -- very ; and
and she went to fetch the beer :
ghosts that wander in the night - time ,
mortal or spiritual lodge ,
so he rested his head
with holy joseph 's legend , on his right
madala 's spring so spoiled for her that day :
that these are the specimens left at the gate
for , as he spoke , a big round drop
a lady fair from over the sea ,
_ my fancy , and set my boyish lips to say _
is just a trick and nothing more .
there furl my sail beneath its beam ;
deft archers , well the deadly craft they know .
the chief , his people ’s guardian now no more !
the following is martin 's translation :
would fain withdraw from that disastrous brawl .
wie zarter elfen chor i m ring
and coming to a puddle , pretty wide ,
behold the old rapscallion crew ,
of hire honour he hadde envie ,
of dream .
a languid laurell'd orpheus in the shades ,
and over them the blessed christ , surrounded
" see that the robes are white you dare to dip in gold and red ;
only the wonder that such things are true .
that stays to vex the moon more fair than all
the early dews are falling;--
song , " we break the glass ,
how 'll a hundred dollars do ? "
err not ? much less for this to be our lord ,
" spring back to you , and more than spring to me . "
alas !   i of the fortune made assay ,
hurra for new england ! 18mo . pp . 112 .
a voice is with us -- a command
the distant mountains seem'd to own his nod ,
he lov'd to see dame nature bare .
at eye and ear ,
some old truth was newly started
sheer from a rock ; a syren of the deep
has found the ideal which the poet sings--
_ the second edition wherein are added divers
i perish . "
in the hearth 's railing -- only a little blood !
a light , a light , in the dead of night ,
was n't quite as sweet as joe 's .
she heard them turn again , ring slowly fainter ,
and all the winged college is at feud ,
the animal life : but is there nothing more ?
or the sestet of " waikiki " , or the whole fainting sonnet
" she shone , and the planets were lost in her blaze .
we may dismiss our inmate to his home .
saul who consented unto stephen 's death !
wide round the wood they go ;
the outlawes shot was so stronge
sometimes i lift a startled head
brighter and brighter the looks that steal ,
and she glided steady , steady and pensive ,
concerning which bards make a pother ,
and beelzebub frowned , for he knew that kind .
whereby the weak are strengthened and the strong
of pardon in my heart for guenever--
ulysses , from his seat arising , placed
" how ! "   they cried in surprise .   " how can you hope to fulfil that
or join him at evening play ;
from whose unhappy womb ,
on the banks of sark , fought anno 1448 . that glorious
you that executors be made ,
party , composed of certain of the guelphi , being headed by the
the greate poet dan lucan ,
is not the sad one of decay ,
we look on , and one common air we breathe :
on the contrary , i 'm conservative quite ;
is her heart in its winter o ' woe !
little wife and all .
a - tripping it over the dew .
the tall towers rose like pillars ,
and on that high authority had believed ,
or sum poor slave beyond the flud ?
broader than the gitche gumee . "
arm’d with stern boldness , and enormous force ;
i love vast libraries ; yet there is a doubt
it was thus that rudyard kipling came to be born in the most
absurd presumption ! thou who never knew'st
stale rose at each newcomer ,
of dancing , glittering , blending tone ,
' weeping o'er my buried father ,
sanctify his stolen hoards ;
at each horn a hundred heroes ,
my country , to thy woods , and streams , and hills !
“ his dying body , and her aiding hand
thy words , which fall unheeded now ,
and overthrown was gorlois and slain .
th ' unfriended hail their calm recess ,
" in blooming years that grace divine he felt ,
" if there is more like ' er " sez ' e.
oh , treachery !
and wept in secret ; and the reapers reap'd ,
lo ! _ our _ books we balance now ;
and all the slaughters that must stain the day .
and our mother of peace has forgot me
but here the crutch is shattered at a blow ,
that emperour he sits with lowering front ,
who demonstrates to me the primal love
and for this cause i axe that ,
undaunted ! lo again this saucy jade
are his lusts bridled more because his parts are hid ?
that had led her to passion 's despair .
' tis all along the hedgerows , an ' all about the lanes ;
the traveller , rising from the banquet gay ,
by thee and those , and all the world be healed . "
are as far from my reach as the clouds above .
thenceforth for a pennyworth passes!--
te patiente meae conflauit imaginis aurum ,
alike upon the slayers and on the slain .
' thinketh such shows nor right nor wrong in him ,
the din of the tempest , the yell of the battle ,
seconds his teacher gladly , " hope , " said i ,
gloomy and rich , which stands , and seems to frown
masters of the ceremonies .
nothing is changed , and yet how changed are we !
and , smiling , thus the royal youth address'd :
and clothes the forest with its robes of green ,
with his hot coruscations : so much more
plundered khan , or caravan
emirabitur insolens ,
full throng of knights , and overhead in gold
unsuckt of lamb or kid , that tend thir play .
that 's the way the baby lives .
and feng province -- just those four .
the world is chang'd i know not how ,
and nothing greater can succeed . ’ ” . . .
the very servants crossed my wish ,
arrayed herself alone in that still night ,
tho ' dangerous oft ,
o ! the joys , that came down shower - like ,
they view'd , and thus pisistratus his speech
have brightened up some little night of time ,
not stirring thoughts , nor yet denying right ;
buried in pomp of triumph 's glorious shine . "
in time of life i graced ye with my verse ;
þe seuenþe ge{m}me i{n } fundament ;
sam dutton put his gun to proof ;
and portents of enormous things ,
( shelley : _ the flight of love . _ )
because i 've lain an hour awake ,
a wretch for murder doom'd , who e'en when fix'd ,
just higher than the heart of me ,
he clambered from his seat with angry grunt ,
millennium at hand!--i'm delighted to hear it--
surged by the flood of grief and shame that rolled
betwixt the pillars , and with great urns of flowers .
with iron hate .
here was the son , the fate - foretold , the outland wanderer ,
i see the other , who a prisoner late
and hoists his handkerchief for sail
a three - tae'd leister on the ither
and dropping pasture bars ,
enfoldest all creation utterly ,
sanction . "
is a king and a justice of peace .
to wait how heaven may yet dispose my lot ,
( ’ twas thus he spoke ) a pious king ,
with their heads downwards .
“ ewr{us } & aq{u}ilou{n } , þat on est sittes ,
tried to sink me with their magic ,
have caused me anguish or regret,--
there was no mother 's son but said ,
regardless of the cost .
to your rich men would be a ruinous dream ;
lest you turn at last to find that you have lost the way to him ,
he dealt it free :
from john maynard 's _ twelve wonders of the world _ , 1611 .
took largely , of thir mutual guilt the seale ,
poor fool ! his food and drink are not of earth .
land of the lawless and inhuman cyclopes . now the cyclopes
" call for them , " answered polycarp .
or peaceful amity or stern debate ?
he wreathed them with lilies and daffy - down - dillies ,
that , breaking , dashed the silver spray
thou wilt not speak to - day .
back flew the bolts , the trembling gates unfold ;
but i , late at night ,
beckon him everywhere .
good thoughts .
rosy and fair , and so took leave of sense .
and lay this sheet of sorrows on the shelf ;
et multo fiat civitas concordior ,
he had a paunch beneath his vest
hum{us } q{ue}rit pl{ur}ima sup{er } humu{m } bona ,
and to be learned it a base thing deeme :
that thei scholde alle jason serve ,
remounting scal'd the flinty steps , which late
on your broad main doth wilfully appear .
fast , fast this day .
who wither'd ere my bloom .
“ alas , poor ghoast!”—i sed to her —
with vizard down and jousting - lance at charge
calls again
and deep and mossy bound and fair ,
and yet his footing somehow did he keep
we thought of a gray life
inscriptions of the romans , of that ' fear of acheron'--
were the freemen wending two and two .
for larder and spit are bare ,
my words are dark , but i can not unfold
may place on it strong reliance .
and green eternal crowns the year ,
i like your cretonne parrots so !
justice oldmixon put me in the parish-
the bleezin , curst , mischievous monkeys
a selection from his poems 1 v.
may fiery coursers sweep th ' ethereal plain ,
spirit of a winter 's night ;
she staggered back and , sinking to the floor ,
she acts the jealous , and at will she cries ;
and as he fell to her , so fell she to him .
aye , ' twas but a dream , for now there 's no retreating :
while with eager eyes they gazed
stric ' master if ' e wants to snare 'em sure .
more quiet than who sendeth
wite up there !   an ' ef belle er
his doghter , which was fair and good
have i , for this , shook ilion with alarms ,
mindful of lovers ' wrongs , and just to injured love .
ere _ thy _ sweet voice be hushed ;
then all the choir of happy waiting shades ,
seem now to bask in a serener day ;
of her corporeal frame to crush her down .
straight before him , for sodom and gomorrah shall be destroyed . ]
an ' the captain waved a corkscrew in ' is ' and .
its cry is like a human wail ,
of fire than water , spite of oaths and tears ,
enring'd each other ; till the seventh reach'd
great flower which is adorned with so many leaves , and thence
or , worse ! that _ damn'd affair _ of _ foreign _ nations .
that yet my heart burnes in exceeding paine
when he himself himself confounds , betrays
of awestruck men -- she did not hear . )
through it the vanished face and eyes
and rolled his old head on that sharp - edged chair - back .
laughs ascend from sequesteréd well ,
that many in seine 's neighbouring stream are drowned ,
when of the rings the measur'd booty made
although it did not bear these names , but bore the name of fruit .
he hath chosen you , to lead
a heap sight more than you .
by human pride or cunning driven
canto cxxiii . the magic car .
quae genus and his birth extend ,
that oft like lightning sudden leaps
to fresher blood , with younger strength recast .
artless and foolish , would not be denied ;
or , next morning , with limbs
and feet and hands the ground beneath required .
this too unmasked the charms alcina wore ,
its spell must close with a crash
opened its ignorant eyes and smiled .
as meru’s(27 ) sacred peaks that shine
eternal , self - existent , infinite--
through sorrow or through joy
educated , who in moments of strong feeling could not strike
with couetyse acloyde outher prodigalyte
show me ?
travel on thy daily journey ,
leave we the mighty phantoms and draw near
devout and let caesar sit in the saddle , if thou rightly
raised suppliant hands and named his name,(264 )
from thence no act could be discreet ,
can rouse no lurking foe ,
i have some friends , some good , good friends ,
and david pryce in temper was quick ,
but now we all clearly see what was the end on't .
it 's that treacherous mammal
o ye , my dear - remember'd ancient yealings ,
" speed ? " chuckled the watch we went lumbering past ;
passed safely tug and dor , though all the guards
daily live as if death 's fingers twined already in thy hair !
sometimes , as if her hope unloosed had
and dora said , " my uncle took the boy ;
whenever the soft wind blows ,
and careful nobly,--not with care that wraps
and when their lords , the mightier , hidden ones ,
i love the merry moonlight ,
he whom he loved was near him in that hour ,
then the goddess , grey - eyed athene , turned to new thoughts .
the foemen are born of thy body , o mother ,
( which is the last place the canadian pacific railway made
and elsewhere soon bestowed it .
o , a maiden flower ,
that the largest of fish in its landing was lost .
all difference with his fellow - mortal closed ,
more welcome notes to weary bands
their spleen in making strife , and safely wording
flies to my head . i listen ....
up the sky
nor stout eurytion ; with pheretus ' son :
there you will find the finest seal ,
wi ' lots o ' munny laaïd by , an ' a nicetish hit o ' land .
views him with brightened eyes , and blesses him
so filled she was with anguish / and so long time she sought ,
thus , as pushkara gave order -- in the terror of his power ,
that never sun and never air ,
was he manifest in front of odysseus , cheering him , and yet
first in the lists his shield is seen ;
whereat he fondly kisst her o'er and o'er ,
" nay , nay , " he answered , " it can not be seen ,
i would not bide with them -- no ! not to win
then when the dragon , put to second rout ,
which gay dramatic tastes admire .
have turn'd my strange life 's future views ,
we see such draping splendours thrust ;
_ the tuenes are up_--french , _ to be shuere ,
and were it not that on the pass of arno
what kentish boor would tear away the prop
praeque sacrosancta splendoris imagine tanti ,
to agamemnon 's tent , where all the chiefs
first let 's behold our natural estate
( when the good king should not be there ) to meet
remorseful passion towards her ,
to remember the words we had spoken ,
desespoir .
at night his window casts a square
roses , you are not so fair after all !
his long career of life again ,
for the kettle sings on the blackened hook ,
oh earth , you are too dear to - night ,
in woman 's heart , nor would have bowed
estranged , and love most bitter on our tongue .
return to rávaṇ when ye will .
think of its gold along the sea ,
she crossed the valley drifted deep--
thro ' the short circuit of th ' arcadian town ,
the ledge , through many a cavern drear ,
by them as if here present , i entreat
not long — for fate pursues him , and the god .
so will i melt into a bath ,
of hope , or joy , to speak ;
heigh o , heigh o , heigh o !
our wedlock and joy below .
but on this verse if montagu should smile ,
for all so lost in love 's supremacy .
our hearts now walk a secret round
whose cheek turns paler
" i see them there against me in a book
calm as beneath its mother 's eyes
the goddess heard , and what she wish'd , enjoin'd ,
thy weary life : forgive me then ,
while envy pales each sullen face :
faded , it seemed , through mists of blood and tears .
romance brought up the nine - fifteen . "
the great church - organ answer as he played ;
stood the wigwam of nokomis ,
of semblance to his personality
_ fairin ' _ , fairing , a present brought from a fair .
rather then human . nor did israel scape
in frozen ridges like to driven clouds ,
sole rest from sorrow ! thou , in whom all worship doth abide ,
but firm battalion ; back with speediest sail
and now , for the first time , neddy felt hungry . so he opened the
for all the storm , for all the hate ,
all left us -- to revere
he was never so corteys a man
her comely form delighted / the eye of many a noble thane .
the creatures abroad as your golden - eyed needles .
his stripling choice : and he did make her his ,
or but to see the shears of atropos
translated by the author from the original bengali
is filled with scarlet flowers ;
unwillingly from question i refrain ,
distributed to all . libation made ,
retiring , on his buckler 's border trod ,
" with one another , we should n't agree !
words of magic round it breathe ,
urge to strict labor . one with dexterous thumb
and touched the tender twigs with green .
in its own troubled world , all fair
night pass'd , the noonday slept on wave and plain ;
those ancient whose resistless eloquence
till in his saddle he was set .
kind of heart
and on the false alcina brings such hate ,
edged with poplar pale ,
depression which permeated the house and made us feel funereal ,
the wretch that 's guilty of that sin ,
the butchers stepped to jolly robin ,
lazarus !   lazarus !   i would give all--
prunella ; or , love in a dutch garden .
either that god through clemency alone
here the idea , all in this mystic handful wrapt ;)
pignora , quae patriis praebere pepercit amicis .
for our dear daughter woo ,
as note of hedgerow bird in ear of eve ,
passed the smoke - wreaths , white and fair ,
his eyes are as blue as the scarf at his throat ;
on the flaming horse of hisi ,
to sever for years ,
when , to their wonted use restored again ,
" if they _ will _ crouch to iran 's foes ,
such blasphemy out - benbows benbow !
then , as it please , afoot or on thy steed ,
distress - guns was firing , the surf running high
ne'er in former times my father
or voice of them that wept ,
ere winter 's frosts shall chill them thro ' and thro ' ;
ut responsurae singula uerba iace .
kinder all earth hath grown since genial shakspere sung !
and all the bright uncounted powers
all may want pardon .
" they in this art , " he cried , " small skill have shown ,
ecce caesar nunc triumphat       qui subegit gallias ' ;
they burned the nightly taper ;
you say , and you 'd say dying ,
in his extreme devotion quickly merging ,
but a few fresh arrivals decided the day ;
and weep'st thou not , what art thou wo nt to weep at ?
steel . in fact , arrow had not a point of steel , but a brazen
and the fog lay on the river ,
through the great press a thousand blows he 's struck :
the first of nature , and the next of art :
" o ge whizz i am proud w'en we come on de crowd ,
his vengeance sunk the haughty foes in night ;
and i , a stranger , peer with careless wonder
_ sweeping down the rainbow road _
even now was bound , a youth of twenty - three .
will be for things the very door of death :
until to - morrow 's test -- might waste it all .
when another that was coming behind it made us turn our eyes to
you women lay stress on your fine perception ,
fairest and sweetest of all her flowers .
where at his feet himaclaya sublime
no cheek 's quick pallor let our secret slip !
where throbs some sick or wounded head .
she was the largest goodliest beast ,
have no more fear--
and all the world 's spring passion stifled me .
thus in the dark , ere the first dawn , methought
so as it scholde of hem betyde ,
que lo encerraba , cual estrecho muro .
once the yard was fertile and fair ,
of circumstances . but in this case we must not simply impute all
in soul and stature larger than thy kind ,
such compositions are not to be reckoned among the great
your neck like the marble , dark flowing your hair ,
and long in senates fam’d for eloquence ;
" here are ceres ' , bacchus ' gifts of joy ;
that as the living cameron
wole gnashed his teeth and turned again to smite
she seeketh not her own honour , but thine ,
as the indian flock , children of paradise ,
and strive such actions to restrain ;
with many a manly shout .
" the shadow lies like wine within a cup
the greatness of her woman 's soul revealing ,
_ your _ business would be done . _ g. m. _ ungrateful men !
fearing the blows that warriors deal ,
note 2 , page 194 . " _ a periwig'd lord of london . _ " the first pitt .
wheels .
" one and two and three and four ,
hath been for seven full years in spain .
oh , this love it will make e'en the fattest one thinner !
wake , for in each soft porch of azure sky ,
but before we go on farther ,
but some have not paid us -- we hope they 'll repent !
doralice ( such the gentle lady 's name ) ,
he sate on a rail , with his head in a pail ,
green was then the linden - bough ,
though the food be rare and toothsome ;
good - bye !
those ancient leaders of the simple age ,
summer is come again !
seer - like , inscrutable , revealing deeps
they saw some berries , bright and red ,
all red , blue , and green,--
is seen a damsel , clad in sable gear .
_ woe befall her _ , _ berngerd _ .
with which they bring it , instruments that 's all ,
her head on a wet heap of hay ,
in some unseen and distant tower ,
drop not a tear then for thy beauty fled ,
thy thirst , which from the triple question rose .
and as he went , his dreaming soul grew glad
thence to the king of heaven therewith to fly .
head upon it .
hermetically sealed ,
they 're always watching for me on the sly ,
and , broad between them rolled ,
thus spoke the daughter of jove , and they obeyed her saying . men
careless if life or art were long
somewhere in history but not on earth ,
music celestial of that choir of heaven
and they floated it down on the course of the river .
i knew not what of white , and underneath ,
i had no intention of alarming you unnecessarily ; but you should
they are fled , and their footprints escape us ,
as the wantonest air that the north can unbind ,
thus in that heav'nly banqueting my soul
had been of being wise or witty ;
mind will rule and muscle yield
and no birds sing .
bodes glory to our enterprise .
and their sweet lips hold the same perfume .
to his imploring child ,
for a folded corner covers ,
nothing he spake , or smooth or gruff ,
young and aged talked and wondered ,
but a miller used him worst of all ,
for many and many an age proclaim
of the ocean smooth and mirrored ,
on realms or towns deserving of their fate ,
but when their delicate touches rest
better to rush at once to shades below
let thine affection struggle with the fates ,
i shall not linger by this porch
for all sighs and groans of anguish
of that monkey , young patrick o'neale ,
dred scott decision : reference to , 42 .
in some dewed dell , while dreaming of one may ,
as they drifted on their path ,
through their brief hour . the heart might well recoil ;
of this name , probably related , figure in the history of the
like as a virgin riseth up , and goes ,
together make a zone of the horizon ,
the rigid front , almost morose ,
that first kiss'd ours , albeit they kiss no more :
men once were we , that now are rooted here .
for rooms remote well search'd , in one arrives ,
oh , tuneful voice ! i still deplore
and , as the bright dimensions of the star
yea , let the gods ,
wherewith the lips of banishment are fed ;
how far removed my lot from your son 's and that of yourself is .
and some in dungeons . but amid it all ,
while his back against a pine he stayed .
for a moon - pale princess of the east , whose very
such depth he fell , that all device was short
and the captain 's breath once more comes free .
or ilium taken , from her topmost height
the ray , that comes from it .   but as the greed
o'er path and road , and plain and dell ,
lo , the valley hollow
thus spake : " if thou through this blind prison go'st .
make witness , here , between the good and bad ,
green pastures are before me ,
the billows darken , or they shimmer bright
daintiest and choicest morsels set before him . when he had played
makes vanish every star :
thou he from whom alone i have deriv'd
by silent forest and field and mossy stone ,
where in black silence none shall cry
he wrapt me close and hid my shame ,
of our unfallen nature , waking oft
olet mecum marito te ,
dust for humility , " he said ,
nothing but robin - songs heard under heaven :
now , if i know him , i shall know your name !
ai me ! why stood i on the bent
if when thy deeds spell _ heaven _
i feel the weight of chance desires ;
all the craft of the wabenos ,
she is so beautiful -- and lays her cheek against my own .
ascended ; at his right hand victory
high with thine own auspicious destinies :
until my inner heart stand in daylight ,
her locks of jet -- is all surmise ;
" my oath ! " the duchess sez . " you 'd not ixpect ... "
when he hales the hills together and bridles up the tide .
" i will ask spring where the fire - spirits dwell ; she travels over
nam'd from the change . she , of her ancient woes
so speak of sixty - one .
and long string beans floating in pans of clear water
in dreamless sleep beneath the silent mound ,
hark , how blackbird pipes to see the fun !
but all was false and hollow , though his tongue
as you drop off one by one---
not on their feet were turn'd , but each revers'd .
but my quick eye might reach not to the depth
demure and brown
good night ! and may all holy angels guard thee !
should tremble at his power ;
this the question of the people :
and nature 's solemn secret hides ,
and fits his singing , like a cunning timer ,
and if e'er
on fancy 's ear .
bryng on of them to me !
( no dramatist should ever be without ' em)--
he drank the poison -- and he died .
oh fufluns ! fufluns ! bacchus -- dark and terrible !
marshals his lords of lust and pride ,
nor ever fair elissa 's name forget ,
and that was olaf trygvason ,
such the spell i cast upon you ,
have discomfited you once already . have you forgotten how when
with their fiery breath made answer ,
but in the shameful day .
this crangonoid is found nowhere except
and star - like , once more gild our firmament .
where never any with good will returns ,
by somebody who is a candidate
our mayster dare we not se .
of their own soul 's expression .   for all these
" those that an armed warrior 's escort have ,
nor can that gentle breast the thought withstand .
there came a respite to her pain ;
shelter of forests , comfort of the grass ,
say thou dost love me , love me , love me -- toll
you feel so free from weight of cares
attest the courtesy of open minds .
will fail to illuminate the infant 's bier ;
what , _ still _ more prosperity!--mercy upon us ,
sole judge of truth , in endless error hurled :
was the sole shadow . deeming this approach
the apparition in the synagogue ,
golden his casque and bow ; his mantle 's fold
out of some chant that demons sing
a monument more durable than brass .
whither away to win good cheer ?
sagest of women , even of widows , she
did in its cluster'd fashions break
lane on the winding earn there stands , vol . i. , 223 .
of them not a sigh , nor a whisper is left .
my dear daughter :
should his child sicken unto death , why , look
and watch fair gold shed gold
and , pent in dungeons deep , await their doom of pain .
the holy man next made the damsel see ,
leaflets on the hollow oak still as greenly quiver ,
but , oh wonderful country of mine ,
to - day , i live .
how the fire - flies in the grasses
full of apes and cocoa - nuts
and sorrow proud to be advanced so
but ' tis my rede to join to you a mighty folk of fight ,
and pulsing brainward with the rhythmic wealth
descending , shall hail thee her " cushlamachree . "
of his foul sins full sorrows bring .
this fortress built by nature for herself
slowly settle to their shore - lines ,
' telemachus , thy goodly - greaved companions are sitting
with a mysterious load of shapeless feeling :
but if flames best like ye , then ,
so spake the argicide , and from the earth
or sun in the valley to shine ?
filled all the genial courses of his blood
  { 501 } " non enim ubique est , qui in excusationem meam consurgens
and gorgeous arras ; there he also kept
if i , my reader , ca n't enliven you ,
softly whimpering -- yes , they 're there .
anon it sparkles , flashes , and leaps ;
even in men 's sight unworthier , being lit
with countless variegated beams
come back dear brother october ,
when weight is added only grain by grain ,
still through the tempest of a darken'd brain ,
then went unto each other / maid and fair lady .
o cynthia ! why so pale ? dost thou lament
from foes .   i never fled , but steadfastly
weary i grew and slept through the noonday hour ;
stray'd all around , and ev'ry where appear'd
toward the center 's downward sweep ;
and the farmers do get richer
often past death 's jaw expanded ,
and , eager to greet them , the landlord came forth .
and cracked the helmet through , and bit the bone ,
lady , my spirit_--
the abbess chose the more experienced hands ,
in mournful tones , these words to sing:--
and my hands with empire quiver .
of his disastrous thumb
no tuneful heralds love to raise
his midnight men were strong and true ,
the fore - front of an age which now had learned to climb
there among the reeds and rushes
the golden spendthrift 's trail among the blooms
o ' course you will know what to do -- hoo ! hoo !
behold ! yon home of brothers ' love appears
stole through the darkness of my father 's halls ;
more pointed still we make ourselves ,
his ears were tickled , and his nose was tweak'd ;
forth he came as light through glass : he came to save us all ,
where darkness was ; there as we crouched with dread ,
ill - suited seems to holy valhal 's daughter .
lay now a colder line of irony
the devil had used them for his steeds of doom ,
like some she - elephant , the dame . ”
for me a desert land .
the love that i shall never see "
and the dire forms of hostile gods appear .
the window - light is glowing bright
because of thamar ; countless is the horde
where of old her wretched limbs
a slumberous sound,--a sound that brings
and to the soft and phrygian numbers ,
like the chaldean , he could watch the stars,[gw ]
melt the bells , melt the bells ,
the council chamber -- where authority
own paths to restore man to his entire life , i mean by one , or
kauppi , maker of the snowshoes ,
but as the weight of death 's strong hand increased
muffling to death the pathos with his wings ;
father is quite the greatest poet
i 'll stick to this o'er and o'er .
the song of moonlight all
and they who in their souls have nursed
to the borders of the cloudland .
halting and harsh , and all unaptly wrought ,
which scarce he could support -- for it would down ,
the race at gaza , for his benediction
to mingle love 's language with sorrow 's sad tone ;
to smile on us benignly ,
before the parson could say grace
los campos fertilísimos , do ledo
your watch is out of order , clearly .
of tenderness let heavenly pity fall
boy , not in these autumnal bowers
chiefly i sought , without thee can despise .
collected , on the goodliest ardour fix'd .
donor of roses and of parching sighs ,
but woman 's lot below ,
future annals shall declare
crocus , and hyacinth , with rich inlay
and , with his veterans , made the attack ,
juvallera , juvallera , juvallera , lera , lera !
i see by these extreames
as to the shipwreck'd mariner , the shores
in small - eyed china 's crockery - ware metropolis ,
thought borrows light elsewhere ; from that first fire ,
then as if some vast wind had swept the room ,
and , purified from every syrian stain ,
to stop some murdering hand fra dooming
you whales , gush forth your fountains of delight !
while willie 's far frae logan braes .
o , if my love be slain or lost
at every mouth his teeth a sinner champ'd
for curates now and cavaliers
from her hidden ports , and a hidden crew ,
but he , through fear of hospitable jove ,
whispered a word that had a sound like death .
the bear , and wolf had munched their stolen repast .
let each be grac't with that which suits him best .
broken , beaten , all unled ,
as to why we were there , who on earth we were ,
love 's strong constraint together impelled th ' enamour'd pair ;
the happy children call ,
lovely , and young , and rich apparelled ,
an ' toss thy horns fu ' canty ;
wise poets , that wrapt truth in tales ,
invoking all the furies to forbid
and he knew on his arrival ,
and smiles as tears ?
an isle with utter clearness lit ,
was there ever so sad a dilemma ?
renown on thee , for he doth live , and looks
o'er the heart that 's beating by me ,
as being true canoebial bliss ! )
the very thought that holds us in control .
rippled the waters , low against the stones
thus did he pray , and all - counselling jove heard his prayer .
for the next , the most blessed of morns ,
kullerwoinen , young magician ,
instead of themes that touch the lyre with light ,
which , proudly he feels , hath ennobled his way .
spring up here and there .
the night is chas'd away .
and where the prudence now that awed mankind ?
let others such opinions hold ,
into the air , returning to olympus .
took his place upon the cross - bench ,
“ in her own shape but now , in manly guise
sing the vengeance of the welshmen of tirawley .
compassion , or my heart will break .
in human bosoms , quench it or abate .
und -- vile ve vas a - fixin'--
against the use of gallant cavalier ,
reuben and dorothy lagged behind ,
with the breath of the bogies in my hair ;
that i should lack thy guerdon , i alone ?
but he , though heaven and hell thus bode defeat ,
at e'en , whan darkness shrouds the sight ,
a sketch by r. h. newell ( ' goldsmith 's poetical
of causes mighty ! cause uncaused ! sole root
each voice that shuns
the scourge of trembling foes :
two happier hearts in all the land
dubiously ascribed to him . he wrote epigrams of all sorts , mainly
greeks departed from troy ; and sends him for further
weighed with this other , was a thing of nought :
ill strives the will , ' gainst will more wise that strives
whose strong obedience broke the sky
were loosed like chafing steeds once more ,
" ah , did you once see shelley plain ? "   -- browning .
there many corpses , rotting in the wind ,
from distant green malay ,
of urban 's to simplicio -- you know well
lo ! christ himself chose only twelve ,
that ev'wy thing that 's bwight must fade , we know is vewy twue ,
who , risen from his trance , gazeth around ,
here end , as just a friend , i must--
soon again i heard a tapping somewhat louder than before .
a score or twa
if jack with his whiskers is not at your side ,
of wine from heav'n her little tass lifts ups
to join the friendly few .
are anemones , myrtles , and violets ,
and every silvan thing that dwelt
his hands upon his head he laid
inferias orphei lethaea papavera mittes ,
world , he must have been here last night , and have had some
" after many years of warfare ,
a web she wove , all purple , double woof ,
how right it seemed that he should reach the span
spring leads on her legion choirs
in the silence of morning the song of the bird .
" what may this turn avail him ? " he exclaim'd .
there walks a sentinel at thy gate
and i , who had my head with horror bound ,
i 'd _ stopped_-like , you know ,
had he but held his peace and given his nod
can beat his shadder , mighty near !
it , but the king keeps it as an ornament of which both horse and
and him who died neglected in his age ;
and the rivers ; the grass , and the flowers , and the variety of
of megara , where car thy brother 's babe
o child of all men 's ruth , if thou the bitter fates mayst force ,
the mind turns fool , before the cheek is dry .
lax grows his joints , limbs toil in vain--
them that honour thee will i be gracious and give them all their
of god,--without word , or one word of command .
follow now the beetle 's hum--
for oh ! believe not them who dare to brand
gave all she ask'd , and griev'd she ask'd no more .
no tavern - bush to proclaim it .
and leave our wealth , our homes and wives ,
at all events , her outward mien ,
and democracy , by gum !
behold the hall where chiefs were late convened !
our ocean - shepherd from the main - deep sea ,
as if they heard god speak , and could not glow .
where the village girls are sporting ,
i think they have ! for money talked,--confessed
to the racing reins ,
she sang this song of god 's mother
to prove , by these , the sons of men may owe
poured colored flames , they , kissed to ruddy shame ,
strong attractions , he had the boy from zeeny so
to wit , a relation from that thing to me ,
of the waters replied , " nevermore ! nevermore ! "
you are my heart 's beloved , mary , you .
“ the damsel ’s named proud ermeline ,
to put upon the cover of this book ?
and , like a lark that sings above a storm ,
it belongs to such alone
from the stream of tuonela !
ardente e nostro dotem habitura rogo .
and broke withal her string of pearls .
by pallas so profusely dealt to her ,
her dropping locks the silver tessin rears ,
then come alternate rapture and despair ;
all along his pilgrim journey ,
pledged me to the pathway of her order . afterward men , more used
of boiling waves , rolling down corpses . this
industrious until
_ shall thirty matted men _ , _ to the clapped hand _ ,
into the roaring woodland where the saplings bent .
was the cumberland whine or the whimper of kelly .
  spite of his hostility to boniface viii . , the worst crime of
lines of 5 + 5 syllables ( _ versos asclepiadeos _ ) are
that bared thy breast for the obscene vulture - claw ,
a thousand guilders ! the mayor looked blue ;
in the wood of lost causes , the valley of tears ,
saw in all their looks and gestures ,
with more of scope , when all is said and done ,
out of athenys for truage
told how it fared with his sweet mistress there .
right on the panting charger swung
" i am thy root , o leaf !   whom to expect
then hyed i me to belyngsgate ;
truly was his guide hither , but of him i have no certain
of the melancholy pine - tree ,
uersu ludere non laborioso
sat and watched again and waited ,
of noonday dreamings under summer trees ,
ye shall dress in damask fine ,
i maruell what from age you do expect ,
oh , credit me , who still as ages roll ,
with filial virtues fair and mild
i haste , i rise , i do the thing he saith .
tender green glads weary eyes to - day , but oh ! that emerald
go rumbling to the mill ,
spiritual freedom which dante is seeking , and which , being the
lascivious eyes ' neath snow - pale sensual brows ,
'bout dat silly chile .
so great in speech , but , ah ! in act
“ now , night expir'd , aurora warmly glow'd ,
no one knows
so the deacon inquired of the village folk
the forty little ducklings , they started down the road ;
soon of my marian , so long laid in earth ?
the river is our own ! and now the sun
as if they already stood aghast
and hide the tarnished name
and so ' tis with many a wonder ,
i with his aid shall nobly reign ,
slumbers , raked up in dust , ethereal fire ?
into strong and willing barrels
he scolded , laugh'd , and spoke no more ,
mr . justice coleridge tells us that wordsworth dealt with
in eating and in resting , and in sport ;
when first by sinless beings trod .
take her with you , i rede and beseech ,
and told our marveling boyhood legends store
of geoffrey 's book , or him of malleor 's , one
a glance frae bessy 's starry een
so floods the air the loveliness of it ,
that bothe kinde schal be served
human , to put on gods , death to be wisht ,
the fourth , who alway rideth armed in black ,
and unto others love is planet - like ,
has any one called ? "
or chain the soul in speechless pleasure ,
before , behind her , and about her , wait
of the gold bed , with hands that hid her face :
and those pathetic eyes of hers ;
he could shoot an arrow from him ,
or wo n't they do to ' decorate ' ?
bears with itself the human and divine ;
exclusively , as that class would use , or at least understand ; but
leaned from their niches open - eyed
to those fragile and faded letters ,
then entered in the potman ,
one told , by colours cunningly allied ,
this was the bad boys ' fifth trick ,
waiting for t’angels to carry thee home .
when i look over what i have written , i am sensible it is vastly
prince eglantine _ eagle _ , with lightning - like glare ,
for duties diamond .
now wound his path beside the woods that hang
uplifted from the soil , betrayed
when death lit all the shortness up ,
sheer o'er the crystal battlements : from morn
oh thou , who dost with cool sarcastic grin
thy lovers fade , or flee from it .
menea fulminante el hierro insano .
se estremece todavía .
some precious , time to spend in rhyming ware .
though cowardly and worthy
( mother of savages , whose echoing hills
bound , caught and shaken and loosed ,
be here advanc'd to heights unknown before ;
' gainst the hot season ; the mid forest brake ,
earth lies laughing where the sun 's dart clove her :
allotted there ; and other suns perhaps
homeward ? this moment she was all in view .
still ' neath the oaks ; for mid the copses round
when landed , squatted on the shore ,
for i can not , such pity is in my heart . "
pero en tanto , buen dios , mi mejor palma
the fishes had taken an eye and his arm ,
where ruthven stood behind the arras - screen ,
" and the laughing brooks are silent .
if any person doubt it , i appeal
and look at me and sigh
death ; and her countrymen shed tears to see
there is none shall know us in fair london town . "
old rhodes ' son did n't have to pay me .
i must affirm it did as much surpass
a living stream of beauty rolls and rolls .
where , in a shady garden - nook ,
responsive to its murmurs sigh .
he bit his lip half through , clutching the jack .
if thou wouldst possess the fruit !
“ never will i teach the strain
a note ( amount not stated ) , with his name on't ,
to warm your souls with its wonder ,
why should i desire to send you to your horrid little whelp ? "
grief shall not break me , nor joys make me blind :
( for the last time i ask , ask earnestly )
and humbled the pride of our haughty invaders ,
their cycling suits were tailor - made ,
and by your palfrey good ,
the sight , wherewith such wonders we behold ,
poni welwch chwi'r gwir yn ymg'weiriaw ?
with weary'd step ; the labor he beguil'd
in four beautiful bows .
i know how fast my tears would swell
' t was hammer , hammer , here and there ,
the little lonely crosses in fields so far away ,
decrees him the winning a worthier mate
like you , a - while;--they glide
( not force , but well - couched fraud , well - woven snares ) ,
v. 60 . foccaccia . ]   focaccia of cancellieri , ( the pistoian
all these may claim me , so that i forget
up flew the windows all ;
and , like the murdered ines fair ,
he was to look at , and so also with his companions . "
nor even thus our way continued far
has slain the suitors , heaven shall bless the land .
the flowers of the forest are a ' wede away .
there , they say , all gold is found .
they call the grisly king ,
  the church - folk , the clergy , for whom god has ordained , --
with martyrdom they proved their constaunce . ]
and now my heart is as a broken fount ,
and pleased , like mortals , with their gay attire ,
let him my games encounter , and win me if he can .
the secret and the mystery
that he plunged for a solution ;
and the silver it destroyed her ,
and being stony - broke , made the best of it he could ,
with strength and leaders matched , the rival armies close .
that a just vengeance was by righteous court
and to the tormenting insects
and the proudest no more smile ;
apprised of the lack in erring brothers .
of flowers that with one scarlet gleam
" and want and wailing turned to glee ;
he blew them at vittoria .
i knew it , oh , i knew it ,
but now he walks the streets ,
he wipes the blood from face , and breast , and limb ,
about her satyr throats and brows
till he shall place her , safe and free ,
ire redire gradu : iam nusquam ianitor aut lex
then ever shall the day that led me here
and in the chequered silence and above
we 're marchin ' out , we dunno where , to meet
between us should rise .
adam said , ‘ i have a letter written wele ,
brave was the arm that humbled harold 's crest ,
as we sit in a fog made of rich latakie
he resolved to die in mother 's arms ,
my dainty dog in sunshine played ,
he said exactly what was right ,
diuitis hoc uitium est auri , nec bella fuerunt ,
where your granddaughters congregate seeking for knowledge .
about all green things live to be thy slaves
swell not so high ,
weighed now as living iron that held him down
f. johnson , of boone county -- this state . "
it 's a pretty early start .
i looked neither up nor down--
quanam sit ratione atque alte terminus haerens .
nor be mingled with the waters ;
with flowers innumerable , grassy groves ,
the bells swing to and fro ,
and , his great object to sustain ,
who sleeps secure from hurt , from harm ,
and , as he craves it , ada sings a song :
which told , he left him tossing in his thought
returning where my walk begun .
saying to the little hunter ,
i thought i heard a movement in the room
as he drew the belt of wampum
slow rises worth by poverty depress'd .
her nice little garden is shaded by trees,--
each a tiny shut - up rose ,
each canto of the twelve , or twenty - four ;
in the time of grief they will come to his remembrance .
eats flesh and bone away ,
o nate mecum , worn and lined
from the character and pursuits of the people
may not unseemly with its stillness suit ,
speak regrets , but never fears,--
her husband posting down
a cool imperial pint your kaiser drains ,
of these , i shun achilles , swifter far
word ! so shouldst thou know what my might is , and how my
as hoary with hope ,
" i have no friends , " said lamia , " no , not one ;
gimiendo tejen sus ocultos nidos .
then certain gents arose and said " they 'd business down in camp , "
dearer than wine zeus carried to his lip ;
who are these artists ; do they paint or write ?
now death steps in ,
or the cold road of knowledge .   when our eyes
to lose his bone , and lays his foot upon it ,
she leaves , but not forsakes . oft in the night ,
and walk with knowledge for a rod .
the oars , erewhile dash'd frequent in the wave ,
so shall the labours of the day begin
' twas ' ere that me sandy broke out thru a window ,
the supreme good ; light , ministering aid ,
mistresse oth ' world and me , and laura is her name .
make your plans to stay ,
most tall hyperbole 's can not descry it ;
bear her down on spyless wing ,
_ y que vale por dos el prevenido . _ »
pleasant city , then the goddess , grey - eyed athene , met him ,
the spirit that inhabits it ;
and a sport to try your training ,
hundred and twenty - five , now , would n't you ? "
and all the bells rang mad with glee ?
unite in thee their rays ;
the tears of night have left it wet .
gallery are discovered liebhaid von orb and claire cresselin .
her lot how oft have envious harlots wept ,
the moon doth with delight
to enlighten with a fable .
they beckon and call me , " come out in the sun ! "
paused -- kissed her hand -- and then was gone .
but his face you could not see ,
and sung their thankful hymns :   ' tis sin ,
in sleep she sobs and seems to float ,
there are too many week - days for one sunday .
and sobered autumn and wild winter spread
though the feild 's eyes too weepers be ,
can but arrest the light and smoky mist
in sooth , he was a peerless hound ,
do you bring no sign from my true love ? "
but if in vain , down on the stubborn floor
with claws for hands , and looks for ever lean .
the sun shines gaily , faint the wind--
it will wait to deliver its message ; and some
if thou art blest ,
the pure , their hands to offer ,
and bade the kindled flame ascend
itself for others . and you seem a soul
have kept them from the life - destroying war :
to pay for .
suddenly i began ,
to raise the mightiest armament ,
door , in paper cap and leather apron , his shirt sleeves
here greece shall stay ; or , if all greece retire ,
until to some conspicuous square they pass ,
" ' what are ye , guests ? on what adventure , say ,
but in his mother 's haughty look
the winding horn and baying hound !
drugged is their juice
ere the birds flew southward ,
how you and i , who scale together yet
how that my soul was for the most part dead .
soon as the little ones chip the shell ,
and the rejoicing spirits , like to spheres
_ the _ wealth obliterates all seeming needs .
and near as the inevitable air ?
to the realm of the departed ,
you might have been ....
and would not by his coaxing be beguiled ,
go to your work and be strong , halting not in your ways ,
when bibo thought fit from the world to retreat ,
miles and miles
now these creatures of mire , they kept whining for fire , and to
the mind of jove on hector 's glory bent .
and we join the world we can love no more,--
circles surrounded by petals of flames -- burn our
the heaving of thy lovely , angry bosom ,
huge atlas was electra 's sire , the same
and the first shot lashes the pane .
wherewith , all seasonable works restored ,
mottled with moss ,
their relation to the english , 314 _ etc . _
_ see also _ heorot
does he live on turnips , tea or tripe ,
scare the deer into the toils . ]
in various talk the cheerful hours they passed ,
although eleven miles it wind , not more
" should this aid be inefficient ,
but look inwards , and begin to live !
and tried to climb to the light
intense agitation of uncontroll'd feeling ,
because all knew not what had moved the rage
to collect his wits and to breathe . "
come noiseless in their silver shoon
and find her , though all dust deny !
" to this the specter no reply did frame ,
by chance , or nature 's changing coarse , untrimmed ;
but ah , of our poor thames she never heard !
what puzzled sir harry , sir will , and his brother ,
but like each other even as those who love .
the vision needs increasing , must increase
head he set his helmet well wrought with a crest of horse - hair
but still within my bosom 's core
this gospel - comet first appear'd .
withered leaves , withered leaves , ye tell a mournful tale ,
in all these things , mov'd in it selfe by love .
the squire 's daughter
and guggling and struggling ,
this pendulum of snow ;
pergit adhuc tenebras mundus amare suas .
from treason 's rent , from murder 's stain ,
sang his war - song wild and woful ,
my deposition , that i might be free ,
whose wrath shall wrap your streets in flame . "
who smiles , count raimond , by thy side,--
ashamed to combat in their sister ’s cause . "
go out and give your knees a chance .
hangs cowering , with a cold drop at his nose .
what way does the wind come ? what way does he go ?
wound up and unravelled again--
i declare , i would not be surprised in the laste
and out on the green tide towards the sea
' till his warm satire shew'd them life and day ?
and you should come in deepest grief and woe--
over the starry border glooms that bound
but they said , " do n't you wish , you may n't look like a fish ,
i love to think of him who made
and the deiected french must suffer all ;
when she came back
due time shall tell .   the circle , that remains ,
he stood and grasped his mighty bow ,
call my ancient songs unworthy ,
to figure forth the hopes i 'd fain indite .
he look'd up , and look'd long in the face of lucile ,
and one is love , whose other name is death .
' oh , busk me in a gown of may ,
must mar your slumbers .   by the plunging light ,
" she , seeing how i sought for gold,--
give ample room , and verge enough
that rebel with his mother in his brows ,
others apart sat on a hill retired ,
this . and that fool yonder ?
his only passion was the love of gold .
the artful dome ionic columns bear
in fancied darkness free .
five chieftains of the vánar race(978 )
out of his hond , and forth he skipte ;
had rated not so high the foes ' array ,
slender sampsa , in his childhood .
" some of them played with the water ,
de innumerables luces adornado ,
which flow'ry vines with subtle interlace ,
think not of the rising sun ,
since thou art guilty of my cureless crime ,
we knew not , fainting and distressed ,
you work no miracle for me
from chair to mirror , from mirror to fire ;
still how the syllables sing
wait till the rolling year goes round ,
then up spoke erik erikson ,
while radisha { 157c } dashes
what ardently i wished , i long believed ,
in that wild race , and , shining overhead
so the anointed and belted spheres , re - risen from their
a sair pain we maun bide .
yet darkling in the moslem 's way ;
for life is short as a happy day ;
she thought her lord to profit , and keep from danger clear ,
who love him more than songs can tell ,
for nine successions uninform'd of love ;
manalainen 's trumpet called him ;
who knew me , and , enquiring , thus began .
next , you will lift your hands and rub your eyes
wanting health for violent and money for expensive pleasures , and
for ' tis hard on any woman to have such a careless man .
" glad to see you , sir , how do you do ? "
and strew my couch with fragrant flowers .
through sunny may , through sultry june ,
here memory mocks the toil of genius .   christ
felix quae magis es nati per funera mater :
and may their wives bring forth to other men !
in return for what ... ah , duke , what is it ? ... a heart
( weeping is the ease of woe ):
that does between them go .
cathleen ( _ half rising _ )
in winged circlets through the dance ;
a crown whose luster is not less .
for feare his sweet heart she should discontent ,
yet once he struggled ' gainst the demon 's sway ,
exclude the first -- one of our most original songs -- from his
when the hunting dogs raged
and wist na o ' my fate .
for nobody cares for thee .
much do i feare back to them to repayre ,
' mid the flower - buds it shimmers
to the three joys in the book of mencius
ye sons of atreus . then , advised , i say
go we without .
for colour and straight stature made so fair .
thence are so sad that the reverse they love ;
yes , it was marie antoinette -- she walked with
of the lands where you have travelled ;
" but how is this ? " i wondering cried--
together we must meet our fate . "
for chast and bewtie deimt ,
the poor weak child will need her : . . .
and breast inur'd to check the tender sigh .
foot , horse , and cannon :   hap what hap ,
these , who were childless , are not they who gave
“ how salmacis so infamous became ,
amid the rustling corn ! )
_ ( all round the sands ! ) _
where 's the cheek that doth not fade ,
but now i find out he 's a counter one , biddy ! "
i doubt thy gaged word ! "
like lions wode , they laid on lode ,
for some vivacity among the fair ,
was driv'n , and through his chest ; thund'ring he fell ,
and the good master : ' wouldst thou nothing then
a land breeze shook the shrouds ,
and summits that had tired the eagle 's wing ;
without a stain ,
i 've been waiting at the door
rightly we heeded not : it was not true .
the work accomplish'd ; the creation closed :
" their hearts sank as they heard me , for they remembered how
happy he whose inward ear
where soft breezes whisper
and avidly opens one 's heart to the law
but cliffs and shaggy shores , a dreadful sight !
to wite what was best to do :
lie here embraced by deeper death than we ;
to hear the doom of the culprit fay .
we are fools , but thou art wise !
behold us -- the rich and the poor--
again you will be a boy .
" the world is vulgar . " didst thou turn away ,
if mighty spirit - strength
or tender azure of a sky
which with his swerd and with his spere
the father first of elenor murray , who
' these saw how many yielded up the ghost
who said , " if you needle or pin shall see
the tamarind on gleaming sands
chattered and danced as they forced him back .
and now at length his wicked act
he answered , ' now you 're talkin ' - dot is yoost vot i tesire ,
as a boy at school in edinburgh and in kelso , and afterwards as a
did slay the other there ,
" they talk uv love ' twixt men , " said ' e.
when the moon 's at full and the long tide creeps
and strive to look at ease .
( sea was her wrath , yet working after storm )
the wondrous wonder of my brain ?
and social , nip his fruitfulness and use ,
and sende a comun pestilence .
watched with sleepless eyes their slumber ;
no honour nor report ,
then we twain never more shall live together
and the watchers stared aghast ,
than never felt this tyrannous alone !
" and i 'm to meet you here , each night , at the edge of the ogilvie
we ai nt no shakes o ' people ; we ai nt up to nothin' new ;
' twas by the banks o ' bonie dee ,
and grievous was the fashion of them found .
a dead leaf on the laurel - bough ,
i know who passed through the dusk
me vinieras á ser menos preciada .
all wisdom forth from his truth - speaking mouth ;
this death of elenor , circles close at hand
to scorn or heed the water - demon 's voice .
who drove him sleepless from his bed ,
" child , wherefore is thy soul now on the wing
then was appalling silence : then a sight
the gay romance of life ,
or on my love their winning glances thrown ,
ah , take one consideration with another ,
memor , quam per tot annos obsides urbem ,
the stated seasons tell , the month explain ,
teeth in length a hundred fathoms ,
and construe on the slab before you :
( sprung of that hated line ) to mars ,
or a young girl dressed out in her new gown ,
clouds overcome it ;
there came one drop of giant rain ,
bloomin ' idol made o'mud --
which in me rises slowly , the dream fairy
of fancy , love imparts
of all the goddesses , did jove prepare
by dymmynge of the day
and the languid leaves ,
" these chiefs to gotelind 's husband a fit return should make
for liger lay already on the plain ,
these were the words and thus spake hee ,
across the splendours of the spanish main
so hard he never saw again .
the burden of my song shall be ,
which held the wit orlando erst possessed ,
they led me to a good man and a wise ,
of the wonders and the splendors that are
but it glitters with fishes of gold .
where it was by the cunning serpent placed .
may his children be strangers to every strife ,
watch him in speechless agony ,
which should have been delight and health
the prophets ever tore ,
if by an arrangement dual
fang and his master side by side were laid
gestation of new states ,
blast drives from the dark clouds and showers down in sheets upon
the fury flew athwart , and made th ' endeavor void .
had found by this wreck a place ;
there spread a cloud of dust along a plain
the head snake - curl'd , oblig'd at once to stoop .
had drunk their juice : part feathered as with gold ;
a common memory of the ways ,
" first we 'll fight the _ hyder ali _ ,
for these , he weened , would sureliest know the truth
but all a phantom , all a trick ,
and love to see themselves , and smile ,
lo , bare , straight legs in the water !
and coursers in the morning .
easily as a god can , and hid him in a thick darkness . thrice did
that forces out its way , so burst at once ,
so that strange pythian madness , whose control
close at my side , so silently he came
between palpitating desires , and fragrant dreams .
into the chambre and whan sche cam ,
intertwining and twisting under .
like sportive deer they coursed about ,
wolves are round thee , night is near ,
the sense of difficulty and the joy of overcoming it meet us with
may reach the land of the farthest star .
nought after this . "
be well contented , if i here break off ,
nor should i have made mention of this dell
jimmy went out into the night to think
popular element in the galician productions is slight , but
" sweet fowl , " he said , " i understand
and in a careless mood thus to him said:--
threaded franconia next , and crost the rhine .
strained o'er the foam , like the hearts at home
thus did they converse . meanwhile the suitors were throwing
them from the bodies of the dead .
in jocum -- get up from your knees ,
grappling with roland stood the sarzan peer ,
" they 'll have a bad end , i 'll agree ,
when the sun has left the hill - top ,
canto lxiii . sampáti ’s story .
upon one little lonely grave that in your bosom lies ;
hewn from the virgin forests by our sires ,
so many hints come to me , but , alas !
whose sounds so wild would ,
and a chill fell on the woman.--"atta ! speak ! is it you ?
anthem of his birth ,
his inconsiderate frenzy off , at last ,
of course there were times , ages ago , when the love token had no
  the tamarind is equally useful and agreable , it has a pulp of a
deterr'd them ; neither was the effort slight
and , ever mild and gracious there ,
sleep then , sleep ! my heart 's delight !
for his bride a soldier sought her ,
thrills quickened with the draught of life ,
but should he prove some deity from heav'n
our blackness shuts like prison - bars :
could kiss her hair ! as if by chance , her hand
she had been constant , loyal even to dreams ,
all things in that sweet abode
thy courage know that shame should rid
cast of hand of lincoln by , 46 ;
and blank leaves once , now filled with kindred claims ,
cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:(249 )
his child was saved .
not a sign of soap about .
in march , his natal month , through sleet and rain ,
a woman 's reason 2 v.
on verse of oldham , 193 ;
forgive the pause .   i tremble with the hopes ( 14 )
whan on my muse the gate i tak ' ,
forgive it to their human - happy ears :
i left the city too , breathed freer then ,
that a screw has got loose appears perfectly plain .
by some means or other , the entire country around for five or six
they 'll want him back again .
and soon agreed that it forthwith be sung .
silence accompanied ; for beast and bird ,
" well i can work , " i said .
with a hey ho , come and kiss me , dolly !
such low - born apes of royal perfidy !
to see the spears cleave the fresh morning haze ;
she reads on in low tones of such tremulous sweetness ,
flecked with light his naked shoulders ,
como en chica rosa está mucho color ,
to shield and spear enured from infancy .
were quite worn out .
all the days that are past and over
to every page my lips i press--
eclipse , and sound of shaken hills , and wings
and she said , little cousin , can you tell me why
the unsexed skeleton mocks shroud and pall .
not proud , nor servile;--be one poet 's praise ,
the queen was in her chamber , and she was middling old ,
it is like a wife , who enters the fire at the bidding of love .
how summer glides away !
are things of the long ago ;
see ! on one greek three trojan ghosts attend ;
and when you saw me pale and thin ,
nor rare perfumed lilies ,
acceptable to me and all this crew ;
laocoon , neptune 's priest , by lot ordained ,
successful , was compensated for his former trials .
' lunar world ' ;
for though my darling can never return ,
and cold the snow ,
a lyric presence loved and known .
' tis not enough no harshness gives offence ,
and mingles with eternal day .
in all the trusting helplessness of love ;
a man must stand by his master
and with him also siegmund , / spake he full lovingly :
llawenydd lluoedd llew ymhryder ,
and dost thou love me — love me best ?
with gods to sit the highest , am now constraind
the unwise passage of laertes ' son ,
he has broken the city gates , and slain 50 men . ]
vowing the direst vengeance , with clenched claws ,
the nobler and the manlier one?"--byron .
the ship is sinking beneath the tide .
the chief jocosely said , ' prepare for france , '
and the dire hiss renewed , and the dire form
who , as along the dust for food he feels ,
but our songs break out of our winter
for whom she made a purse of beads ;
choricius in fabric . bibl . gr . t. viii . p. 851 . logois gar estia ,
taking three steps in advance , and one reluctantly backward ,
that you may always know him by
yet zoilus will be far away . "
thy voice sounds like a prophet 's word ;
you were in the dolls of my childhood 's games ; and when with clay
" what muns do theer , lads , every one ? "
are here united found ;
his nephew , had a post with olivier ,
caught and prisoned the moon - beams ;
upon a noon i pilgrimed through
a tree 's _ head snaps_--and there , _ there , there , there , there _ !
and why your florence of delight
but thou art not afar ,
came to london on his pension .
as one pursued , and journeyed on .
were nothing , so inveterately , that men
are you christian monks , or heathen devils ,
with full merry pastime / joyfully the hours they spent .
and birds are loud in arcady ,
and give each deed th ' exact intrinsic worth .
each sounds your praise , and war is all your own .
hear the rustling of her garments
he never drank one drop more .
the dark from off our dolorous lids , to see
there is a pause more holy still ,
methinks i see thee in the streaking west
( sweet to meet upon the street , why must i be so shy ? )
on the peaceful star of evening
the day is long and the day is hard ;
and i weep ;
for youth goes over , the joys that fly ,
( with this vain search delighted , )
' you will find on it whorls and clots of
if he should be rumoured anchoring in the road ,
hustles the class !   and they ring themselves
i 'll tell you what i heard :
in the mottled rocks she hid him ,
prepared to give their wealth away .
geri of bello .   thou so wholly then
that i have long'd for in my fierce abodes .
floated the vision of his lost delight .
would like the job of buying little shoes for seven or eight .
i sat poring o'er the codex ,
_ and the lights of a hundred cities are fed by the ancient power ;
that dame adalieta weds to - night
alone as knyht aventurous ,
and heaven 's glory , whom this happy hour
red though their flints be , they are not red with gold .
_ elf _ , a puny creature .
the great soft moor - winds ; and the dear
each setting - day ; for him each rising morn.--
" how launcelot still'd their bawling , the mad fit
a deal i 'd sweat and little earn
rubbed her hands and knees together ,
( whoever may ) the terrours of his fate ,
nor can he be at rest
and helpless victims with a sense so keen
and , robert browning , you writer of plays ,
sharp pittances of years ,
burlándoos si os quieren bien .
þe{n } wolde [ i ] no lenger byde ,
glow in the breast , and sparkle in the eyes .
come , brothers , seek my friend and bring him in .
ruby , garnet and amethyst --
for whom i took thee , when so hastily
where she was professor and head of the english department .
i 'd hear you tell the oddities men do .
she met the goddesses , and stay'd their course ,
with royal guards began the endless road ,
from her wide wound ?
god drave asunder and assigned their lot
and the shrill winds were up and away ,
where the smart procession goes ,
an ill day that for me !
all regrets are now in vain !
after a pitying sigh , directed her eyes toward me , with that look
and twice as deep as earth is distant from the skies .
these i could bear ; but not a rogue so civil ,
forever to my side ,
i can not break this fearful spell ,
never while the moonlight glistens ,
and still my heart at the remembrance skips
so hurried they are , that it force them to pray ,
i do not see the hills around ,
my bosom checks the rising sigh ;
sorrow and mourning wait at his command ;
in a land beyond sight or conceiving ,
now you know the sacred story
lived at xanten ( see note 3 to adventure ii ) , as this was
within thy woods are not more fleet ;
the philosophre in his resoun
the glad , illuminating sunshine fell
a wave to pant beneath thy power , and share
returns to progress .
breathes out in agonies a sinless soul !
row , then , boatman , row !
mounts rich _ sir dunce _ , and seems to ape the great ;
had he the power to spurn !
and some would drink and deny it , and some would pray and atone ;
deep in the thickness of the forest
to whom the sibyl thus : " compose thy mind ;
there be thirty chosen prophets ,
a stranger still , though long possessed ;
once did my thoughts both ebb and flow ,
i have eaten the bitter herb of the rocks ,
to slumber , though the big tear it renewed ;
and female courage she alwaye
of a dream that is ended .
and forget the cruel city -- on this first blue day of june !
till i know a reason why .
lo , from ilion 's topmost tower ,
possessed a " reasonable ear ; "
on our own field and by our cattle 's flank
the odour of the woods , bring more content
such was diana 's , such minerva 's face ;
as i sat there and mused ( the way
have with old times decayed .
so speaking , and yet distant from the shore ,
and preide it scholde wel ben hid ,
was she , but smil'd thereat so joyously ,
with blyther vigour ; nought around we see ,
to overtake me ; but the load they bare
judge we by nature ? habit can efface ,
" but nay , beloved siegfried , / thy death i fear ' twill prove .
the hillside as in fear , and the poor hands
can not make it old !
and then along the plainstones
an ' he says : " i 'm dry as h -- ll , so ,
and still no neared to the light ,
south , north , and everywhere ,
but populonia 's mother - land had given him there to hold
damnation then would be our fate ,
or run , my own adopted bride ,
but for the sacred blood of israel .
a well - proved casque , with leather braces bound ,
sat the hungry crows and ravens ,
thus , of some awkward fears possess'd ,
funereal memories alone remain
o'er the creek , through ferns and mosses
she trembles like the pampas plumes .
according as fortune may fix ,
en de missus come en go
each in his ordered place .
' my king , that i shall faithfully
she was a good deal shock'd ; not shock'd at tears ,
and there his nag did kick and prank ; he , haw , hum !
true , it did seem almost wicked ,
thou wilt not pass by neptune unperceiv'd ,
o'er vantages of wealth , place , learning , tact .
this , i thought , should surely be
already aim'd , and to apollo vow'd
thorough this ford of fire i wade , and see
ah , desperate mortal ! i ev'n dar'd to press
' twere time this war to an ending came . "
their weeping night the symbol of our prayers ,
the skirmishers begin , they crawl cautiously ahead , i hear the
that on the front of noon was as a flame
could not fight without his arrows .
lizards mingled with the serpents ,
lo ! with disorder'd locks , and streaming eyes ,
labouring the soile , and reaping plenteous crop ,
i struck , and with a single blow
for instance -- the plan , to be sure , is the oddest!--
thou spares , alas ! who can not be thy guest .
" how they 'll greet us!"--and all in a moment his roan
praying comes to ganges ' waters ,
and when i beheld them aboard and afloat ,
the same kind office for me still ,
how sweetly wind thy sloping dales ,
comforted with the extendings and holy , sweet inflowings
and wear a shape thy mood to fit ;
ram who was far the best and the goodliest of all the
witness the lands which ' flow'd with milk and honey , '
when , from the city of the blest ,
soul wearies soul , i find .
( think he was goin' t ' be shot ! )
shaped for the hand , that holds and toils and strives .
when other healings all were asked in vain ?
" to arms , to arms ! " the bold thalestris cries ,
a solitary shriek , the bubbling cry
a deathly pallor sits , while down the lane
there came a thundering from the topsail yards .
a race of men defies his power !
for he 's been long awa .
what girl is she who peeps
before his lonely dwelling formed a porch
says little jack sprat .
his friend by long hereditary claim ,
and others in the minor moans
what ails thee ? what is't gripes thee , elf ?
those robbed at such a time obtain
god the first and best adviser ;
not shortened that it could not save .
ordinary unemphatic english accent is exactly a raising of pitch ,
with bleary , beery eyes ,
the weary time she can not entertain ,
wainamoinen , old and trusty ,
doth of itself receive , no influence
drove back the troop of hannibal in flight ,
of all for which life prays ,
in gebrindt in many a lant ,
in fact i 'd sooner be dead .
fadus , herbesus therewithal , rhoetus and abaris ;
attributes.--felton .
oh , it 's pleasant sitting here ,
" i more would say , but now again
readers ; correct intelligence , sprightly and elegant
his sinister glance and his furious growl ,
yea , as agastya slew the foe ,
_ lady . _                      fool , do not boast .
is your happy kingdom lost
the tufted crow - toe , and pale jessamine ,
not sullenly excludes hope 's smiling rays ;
and the scene is tinged with a quiet melancholy ,
from the fire - place spake a wizard ,
and once a church - bell pealed .
and the mills , and the stores , and all that !
a somewhat different version is given in durfey 's pills to purge
and with pearls her brow is studded .
is trembling left , and infelicity :
i 'll buy a few score sheep before i dine ;
and the various ascents thereof , from the time of saussure to the
of her deep - lustrous eye , and knew that hers
descends there to draw from the hoard .
upon thine altars one poor kusa - blade !
in short , unless well - cooked , i do n't like birds .
o wanderer into many brains ,
perplexed my mind ;
shall live with her enjoying , i extinct ;
and their best service lend
i never from thy side henceforth to stray ,
where thought hath swept her purifying wave ,
and he fluttered about
near to the well of wit ,
brood , kind creature ; you need not fear
and the grape - vine , the bemahgut ,
were " let us be friends ! "
and dies o'ertaken by the squatter 's fires ;
i give thee ; in his own name , too , like host shall pallas bring . "
oh mightst thou lykewise please apollo 's eye .
and sometimes for an hour or so
and take enough for bare existence . "
virtues that thunder and thrones that endure
double - lived in regions new !
" we saw a hideous phantom glare ;
" lo ! thy sister too has perished ,
he , too , has spurred his charger o'er the dead !
fair branch of honour , flower of chivalry !
_ nemo tam prope , tam proculque nobis . _
had any told to etzel / how stood the thing before ,
strike not your standards to this miscreant foe ,
anon he bends , yet neither moans nor weeps ,
oh , where are my dreams of peace and delight--
furtive converse , gliding glances , futile kiss
engage my eyes while looking through the morn
‘ then fare you well , you cozening lord ,
to have neglected that he should have done ,
and five minutes later the three of us had joined
and it 's just birds'-nesting time .
" i am the siren , she , whom mariners
here and there , that i ne'er knew
blinded they into folly run and grief for pleasure take .
one planet broke the lingering ranks of night ;
where god 's own singer thatched his sunward nest ,
aspired to conquer .   either at the first
when in the chronicle of wasted time
their murdered infants round their necks , slay me ,
th’imperiall wreath plac’d on his princely browe ;
the christ - child lay on mary 's lap ,
" well , " murmured one , " let whoso make or buy ,
the pagans ran transported with their ire ,
from the nectaries on the mountains
it bridged the shaded stream with gold ;
and fayrer yet whereas the royall seates
for the under dog in the fight .
hark ! of the newest fashion is my song !
and when i heard , in lisping accents ,
who kept his policy , and kept the _ times _
he leaned against his window - bars to rest
with mad " halloo ! " and wild alarm
and with the wommen otherwhile
silence above and silence below :
that she obliged herself with her to stay .
" in vain you dress your flowing hair ,
let pope lull all his _ dunces _ with a yawn ,
all hands stood by uncertain would the anchors hold or no .
and ere he led her into ruin 's way ,
i know you would gobble me up if you could ,
her bosom on the heaving billows .
her robe brusht softly ; o'er her chamber still
all is god 's ; and yet ' tis true
whom they returning hold for fair and sage ,
when keethlah in appolo ’s art ,
templé tu sed , y me llamé tu amigo ;
knowing neither pain nor trouble ;
the king himself holds all by his command ;
certain that the star of waring is destined to rise again
who could have thought the smile he wore
its truth was hidden , and its light obscured
well , well !   not beaten -- spite of them , i shout ;
compassed she is with thorns and cankered flower .
  " come with me from lebanon , my spouse . "--the song of
beauty calls and gives no warning ,
and rises up to its very tops ,
why lootin ' should be entered as a crime ;
till wakened by the morning beam ;
such primaeval being as o'erfills the heart with awe ,
the fighter 's strength , the echoing strife
at length , while reeling on our way ,
clearer loves sound other ways :
love , in thy everglades , moaning and motionless
on the world in other regions ,
as the ocean surge o'er sand
and the billows drove them onward .
scorned by those slaves his former bounty fed ,
figures with the brush of the night and the day .   behind it thy
how soon the summer 'll pass,--
he sees his nephew lying dead , and mourns
and cheat your eyes .
one single favour do i crave ,
in thee must ever find a foe .
and his two broken shins ,
curling , breaking into dust .
half hours with the classics            _ h. j. deburgh _
_ i know
this city of york is a place of great note ,
the youth remained , yet had no power to bend
blue stags and red baboons and birds from sarawak ,
þ{a}t erthe oute of erthe    to blys may be browthe .
would be discover'd in the human soul !
pricks with vermilion some clear porcelain vase ,
then had she been a maid of mine , my fellow and delight .
how fierce soever , he shall find it hard ,
and i sat on the witness stand as blind
is opening for the souls in prison !
well , her smile is but a mask ,
less than the trust thou hast in me , o lord ,
till coward death behind him jumpit ,
runs backward from the sea , and hides his head ,
" sir , what is this ? "
i doubt na , whiles , but thou may thieve ;
and in wrong direction drew it ,
the steel it draws to it ,
weary at hart , and sick at soul !
me to the place where i would be ;
and hear the thrushes singing in the lilacs round the lawn .
are dull and torpid .   to die young is best ,
the offerings and vala and priest denied
and over the grass would seem to pass
there lie memorial stones , whence time has gnawed
flowers blossom by the pathway ,
moated and high and by fair woodlands hid ,
ignorant , devising their own daughter 's death !
as he with winged words , imploring , spoke :
an ' he be claimin ' payment with his breakfast for the score .
from the time it was put in the ground ,
in the pastures by the river
widowed now of all love 's pleasures -- of her noble kin despoiled ,
heaven fill’d up all my ills , and i accursed
farewell , if it must be , but save me grief ,
and honoured to profusion by his country--
but douglases were heroes every age :
was virgin of all waters laid the lad
o that i were where helen lies
scarce had he finish'd , when , with speckled pride ,
the fitting on the robe -
her secret , though itching
a sojourner and stranger in their midst
while wood and hill and valley sent
the best of that sort since poetes first began . "
fat caterpillars drift around ,
after the knowledge of our buried life ;
morn 's genial influence roused a minstrel gray ,
the following coronach .
wi ' glorious light was glintin ;
he greeted me an equal and i knew ,
calls , to succeed his cares , the watchful swain ;
a sort of magic wand ,
i crave to hear . is he not old , his prime
to knowe the preuy counsell of theyr lordes mynde
whiche neuyr schal haue fyne
had pigeon - toed away ,
if my presaging soul divines with truth ;
wilt forth to meet the enemy . / he 'll offer service then
on ellis 's view of accent , 4 n. ;
blown loose from the hair .
where the fierce giants fought and fell .
indugredi sceleris ,
bitter in dool i lickit my winnins ,
_ lucy . _                         on my knees i implore .
my bonie lass , i work in brass ,
in this uncovered world , so rich and pure
leaving this life of dew - spread lawn ,
awful eternity ! offended queen !
in some sweet inland vale should find
' tis past -- to them and thee adieu--
vanior iste fuit risus , an iste dolor ?
and i recall , lose , grasp , forget again ,
“ ris , aproche þe{n } to prech , lo þe place here !
and terra , whence you took your flight ,
with all the longing of a mother ;
the cry wrung from thy spirit 's pain
he himself , old vaeinaemoeinen ,
to bring thee twilight . still , ah ! still the hum
hidden deep for many ages ,
did all they could to wound another 's fame ,
of the crystal heaven , and buries all .
labyrinth , which he himself had designed . the story of ariadne ’s
the partners of his fame and toils at troy ,
and he who feeds the ravens
shall rest awhile ; when morning shines in air ,
such shadows are the weak brain 's forgeries ;
i walk down the garden paths ,
sweat of a torn branch
delicately and imperceptibly ,
kiss me who hold thine image in my heart .
my face again i ne'er can show ,
all stood like statues mute and gazed
in stormy seas , rent the indifferent sky
and frantic passions hear thy soft control .
or better , run away
which welcomed it and broke into a little smile
nothing i said as greener you grew and taller ,
a woman , ( tho ' the phrase may seem uncivil , )
nor could the triple world withdraw
when men the sole - begotten crucify ,
to the prison - cell my sight ,
dearer and nearer , as the rapid of life
' tis a wonderfull thing , the strength of that part ;
because a woman with corn - colored hair
and against the king 's party raise arms ;
broken to right and left the dark wave sighed ,
harrison , general , how preserved , 431 .
now , meliboeus , graft your pears , now set
with some new fool in tow .
the lordship of a rival ’s son ,
and to the deep abundant sand his outstretched body gave .
a rose and a tear--
love the steersman , to and fro ,
forgotten as a fire that once was singing gold ,
clasp her and hold her and love her ,
gunther left he standing , / upon gernot to dash ,
but as cover for nakedness -- guilt to relieve .
i shall have conquered once that now are ruled
plantureux , rose pivoine , le vent n'a retroussé
and she asked upon her coming ,
bride of my heart , and empress of my land !
thousand men chose hagen , / who well to him were known .
baith , both .
and , taming all the unbridled lusts ,
how can you lend your theme its force ?
" to scale the place a way i found ,
fame of her virtue shall never perish , but the immortals
' ud melt the ' eart - strings of a chiner dog .
she was not made out of his head , sir ,
still must he grind his foolish grist ;
whate'er betide , and feel no coward fright .
shatter the trumpet , hew adown the posts !
" content , " quoth he , " since of one womb ybore ,
of the ancient town of bruges .
save for this cot of native stone .
what patience or what reverence withheld
and an angry woman was she ;
of the boulder - strewn mountain , and when they will crop .
troy charged the first , and hector first of troy .
that , when my spirit , which thou madest whole ,
" with hand in hand like links enlocked ,
others , who seek from nature no reply ,
bear the faint fragrance of a rose--
new bodies for these feeble forms ,
fierce though he be , and huge of frame ,
the ring of thy song ,
and ranged in rows about ,
military talents . "   hist . of flor . b. ii .
let it be pure and strong .
and all its strings of laughter and desire
shows on his deed,--the charter of the soil .
she struggles thitherward by day and night .
four - and - twenty years he reckons .
o father , touch the east , and light
that if folks were to furnish me now with a suit ,
and then i seemed to hear a sigh,--"julia ! "
now beside the angel bent ,
the lifeblood of the steed .
all the richness of the gifts
' till i found to my horror ,
they on their tiptaes slippit up
single guinea he could call his own . this gave him great offence ;
( o strange ! ) demands the help of night .
the _ koels _ were weary of their songs .
and every tint of rose or fawn
and that hail is formed by the rapid motion of the snow as it
when love hath called aloud in vain
calmness , " you 're the fellow that 's making all the
gifts blind the wise , and bribes do please
and led the man this madcap race .
o ' hell 's damn'd waft .
hic vestrum panxit maxima facta patrum :
i do not know , nor may i say ;
carrying a foul and lazy mist within :
for it is thus with the child of god ,
when the stalwart ludeger saw noble siegfried nigh ,
and i whispered " wh - s - st ! witch - hare , "
and the air was full of fragrance ,
do n't hear what they say of his birth ,
its eyes are gray ;
o loved for ever , evermore !
that e'er were brew'd from elements or gore ,
jupiter , places the habitations of the gods on each side of it ,
or the wild white ibis , dazes
yet the world loves the darkness of the night .
redde legiones ! '
now there has been indissoluble union of the twain :
he ate his lunch at breakfast time and said it did n't matter .
trap ! trap ! went the gray ;
the thoughts of growing , even on earth , divine !
i turned to the steep path of fame ,
bears him on the path of zephyrs ,
flectere ludus equos et spicula tendere cornu .
when i forget thee , willie creech ,
but had i then foreseen what now i know ,
" nor may we breathe the fragrant weed ? "
she 's so the rarest
respectively . in the former the ways and moods of childhood are
o dear mither . "
was needless , as at sacrament
and leave him in dominion . what to me were heaven
for , like strains of martial music ,
long and far sought for wi - no - na ;
he 's flying a belted sword ;
and he spoke the words which follow :
for lachlan lo'es the smiddy 's reek ,
his shadow in the moonlight shrinks from him
my works are nearer heaven , but i sit here .
all thoughts of marriage to a future day .
bonnie , blooming jessie .
that sark she coft for her wee nannie ,
are nothing but the splendour of the idea
quickly to the house to bear it .
at the hearth - side . nor failed the master swain
bearing the very " soul of a soul " ,
when i heavened me in thy kiss ;
we loaf where the wind - spilled fountain plays .
but , ere he passed on , turned about at last
and when this army is subdued and slain
the hopes , the joys , the laughter and the tears ,
the lady mabel rose from her bed ,
the hardy scythian stammers at your name ;
i miss him -- but where are the words to express
though there never a bone or a guinea was found .
the panting stewart saith .
under the hawthorn - bough
but soorj dehu the rajpoot owned neither town nor wall ;
the gem within will tarnish too .
gay caps we here of foolscap make .
hominum qui facta , mores , pietatem et fidem
of rapt devotion ev'ry lower sphere ? "
him , known , but dimly in the gloom descried ,
while , if i issue from the town ,
god save the king , and bless this land ,
is brief as last year 's suns , or last year 's snows
with fingers of lightness set sobbing
the crisp brown leaves in thicker shower .
with furious wrath was stirred .
ch ' or non havria de la meonia tromba
_ lama sabacthani ! _
nor vineyards waiting , nor reproachful thorn ,
and all the banks did as with plaster line .
fretted with many a rift and scar
exposed their inexperience to the snare ,
" he loves me not , loves me , he loves me not " ( o jealous one ! )
the gloaming hies away like one forbid ;
no one thought that such misfortune
with but a chess board to divide ;
you owe me ten shillings ,
are those billions of men really gone ?
( used by permission of s. brainard 's sons . )
gently she fluttereth over it ,
pious reason for not enlisting , _ ib . _
_ " small service is true service while it lasts . " _
the stripling would observe his faith , and prayed
fair seeming , prosperous send - off and return .
the crowding , struggling world of men fight through their busy
and the din of it seemed to shatter and scatter the sheeted dead .
the voice , that firstlew by , call'd forth aloud ,
despised of god and hated of his foes .
" o never then , my friend , let grim despair
rooted in the unshaken strength of earth ,
behold a ghastly band ,
my own canadian girl !
and crept by chance in my unwary breast ,
branzardo and the king of algaziers
my eyelids sank in stupor , that dull swoon
cclxx . to lady glencairn . gratitude . excise . dramatic composition
of his highway nine hundred times and thirty ,
shone hope , more lovely than a ruby star .
cuando en ti fijaba
for as they spoke the rind their mouths inclos'd .
thin , elemental people dear
and season him thy last and sweetest prey .
beneath the clattering iron 's sound
der spiegelt ab das menschliche bestreben ....
bright with the hues from wider pictures won ,
dark is the morning with mist ; in the narrow mouth of the harbor
there , where gibraltar 's cannon'd steep
" you have come back to us just as before ;
heard they from the woods the rumble
believe in god as in the sun,--and , lo !
mocked and forsaken of the fiend their sire
invade the shrine where sacred lies
for love of hearth and home to raise a burg their walls above .
after riding them about for some time , and having great fun with
for the launch of the white canoe .
di 's ankles , that the clover seemed
no meaning to be known of any man ....
to hide the fervor of her blushes ?
' tis one ! then take it on the other side ,
where scowling fortune seemed to threaten woe .
aut bothering aliquid referentem , constat amicum .
w{i}t{h } gentyl ge{m}meȝ an - vnder pyȝt ;
' thou receiv'st and receiv'st not christ ; for he
and does not love like god 's demand
to feed their wasting fires , the lamps of life obtain .
winter chills thy mossy bed ,
en vano es detenerme y predicarme .
her sweet three corners in ,
for we fancies ourselves at two thousand ,
diffusion of millions of enjoyments .
who , more than all turks , is
your peaceful zeal shall find .
it is a pity fools are prone to scribble ,
himself he quickly from his saddle throws ;
to god , the preserver . the lord knew that the virtue
toiled through pathways long and dreary
come let 's drink , the time invites ,
smile at my perilous abandonment .
" with her heart in vision burning ,
" what have i done?"--i hear you cry ,
the beauteous dame , he laid the thought aside
donald , no longer stay ;
that hast thou disposed me . "
limed by their art in vain you point your stings ,
with little seal - work damasked .
now foes on foes came pouring on the fields ,
if the wind and the brook and the bird would teach
forth through the gloomy spaces of the night ,
do we behold the line of erin 's coast?[a ]
for ' t is a low , newspaper , humdrum , lawsuit
as mighty virtue as on earth doth reign ,
now strike at hector . he is here;--himself
romantic actor , who enthralled my soul .
bright nodding daffodillies ,
for fierce vidrik no one spares .
with open wings , a dragon breathing fire
i 'd spend it all upon you .
of all ; for on them all eurypylus rushed
welkin and sea were one black wave , white - fanged ,
your affectionate husband ,
and seek spring chickens in the spring !
deep shades of the hills of habersham ,
the king then sent to fetch him : / with his train of men
" hold hard , sirs , give them half a minute , "
and his song -- all belong to you ,
up , up , lies my course .
and sat down to smoke and ponder .
but my heart will cling forever
and cometh to implore thee , " said the poet ;
and me bistowed in so heygh a place
memphis renowned for pyramids ; in sight ,
they steek their een , and grape an ' wale
who on pine - nursing vesulus a many years hath thriven ,
and blows his breath o'er sea and land ? "
without attendants , and to horse , to horse !
her head so winsomely to see
|refrain|
through the air ,
she in that cottage there , knitting her healds ,
against the bars of our torture - cage
to the town hall came flocking :
england 's queen of many days ;
" a magistrate may charge a pound
disgracefully with baffled aim :
he fell headlong from his chariot . he also speared areithous
he saidt , " mein name is janosch ,
that when thou pleasest canst do wonders ;
with sítá there shalt thou delight
but , torn from the arms of their parent trees ,
he who looks for you in this way , mary , becomes quite gray .
their blood poured down all in vain for us ,
preserves alike its bounds and boundless fame[fw ]
on angling turns my story :
and gloaming steals from her purple cave ,
round with face unscathed ;
ae fareweel , alas , for ever !
widens out her corporation ,
dismayed to find her clothing tightly bound
hath drawn his weapons on thee .   " as they spake ,
and hear the tender harmony
" it never was yet in father 's hide
ye mauna be proud , although ye be great ,
in huddled isolation faring
a lark 's song
but if the son of atreus , our supreme ,
like sculptured effigies they might be seen
in full harmonic number joined , their songs
the epic hopes of a people ;
but near to my heart her image lies ,
upon an olden tale , a useless allegory !
ag o eigion afonydd
i meant to call a freak of youth
land , but sin and shame so much the heavier for himself , as he
sparkling in air , and splashing in its tank ;
a morning freshness not of the earth
it is n't right to make it seem
god 's herald prove a heartless thrall ,
with a calm confidence the whole long while
to the prison of the fiends ,
in the acadian land , on the shores of the basin of minas ,
trapped like a hare in the toils that day .
or later , when dealing with a pre - y.-m.-c.-a . america .
is mapped , and charted too !
perhaps by some deep - shaded pool at last
were the blest words he said ;
and there ought to be a corner for me
and man 's o'erdriven noon devour
that ' gainst some forest driving all its might ,
e'en such made me that beast withouten peace ,
huddled , but stern to hearts whose cold pride takes . "
he saw his friends , who , whelm'd beneath the waves ,
and never was heard such an outcry wild
that only land where human joys endure ,
" can shepherds love ? " said phillis to the swain .
whose dwelling is the light of setting suns ,
of alle wommen be he waried ,
hadst thou not thus , with insult vain
in snow - white milk abounding : yet for me
‘ lo , sir , what this potter hath give you and me ;
sweet spirit , comfort me !
so it would show at least a mile .
in our joys and in our sorrows ,
age not reckoned in spirit - land
lebe wohl!--ach , tausendmal
we hallow thee !
to build a nation from .
this is my little boy 's birth - day ;
her eyes , like marigolds , had sheath'd their light ,
no good dish to suffer on borde to be longe :
let our skill be fully tested ;
i feel the electric thrill , the touch
( warm rains washing
with gentle penetration , though unseen ,
he brought ; the choicest of the tusky - kind ;
to her fair works did nature link
that will require most patient fortitude ,
came the hurrying stumbling feet .
shelter and home , while many an exile 's exposed to the tempest ,
contemplative fancy ; false appearances , i say , as being entirely
i 've learned your candid soul . the venal,--
that on no joy , while so i lived , hath stayèd .
" the desert - dust hath dimmed it , the flying wild - ass knows ,
messengers crossing the sea ; on the contrary , kriemhild
the salt - licking skerries , weed - wound , smeary !
eighteen hundred eight and thirty ,
she reach'd , she touch'd the snowy sands ,
one tells , how at christ 's suffering the wan moon
the beggar 's whine as he looks at it,--
of the marriage chamber fast was made the door .
a sightless giant wandering without rest ,
say , great eurypylus ! shall greece yet stand ?
in fight to cover .
from the borders of the village ;
passing the pipe sedately to and fro ;
if , while around thee gales from eden breathe ,
alas ! we move but in the hebrews ' ring;[d ]
then being asked , where all thy beauty lies ,
a little space we were remov'd from thence ,
behind the bush ; and very near ,
the snake had sometimes nothing to eat ,
a gangrel clan that someone flayed ,
fires from the circling gathering . powerful thus ;
followed mohareb 's way
i am going on service , away to the battle - ground ,
bot al that myhte him noght availe ,
until there came the question , " is she gone ? "
they bless the virtues of the glass . "--_ed . 1786 . _
above , i must add that , while my impression is that what has been
can i not sin , but thou wilt be
his speech is a burning fire ;
for a day and a night .
" you are old , " said the youth ; " one would hardly suppose
with the very bluest stockings ,
and i wish not for thy silver .
his beauteous mistresse , and she too
an altar raised to vengeance ; and to ply
already on my temples beam'd the crown ,
old aden , like a barrick - stove
and cold fear smote him till she spoke and said :
till he rose a lifeless corse .
the delicate stem most deeply love the rose .
and th ' world may seem as blind as thee ;
his manner good , his language fair .   }
the space , surrounded by the four , enclos'd
into the hide of kaiser bill .
for weirdless days and weary nichts
then he stood up , and trod to dust
therefore from russian antiquity and from popular legends .
as banner in a temple o'er a shrine .
yet on the croup the stripling tumbled back ,
from furious sappho scarce a milder fate ,
in that i was a fool , and lastly blind
we have drunk from the same canteen !
with justice for their motto , they reflect
to measure heights with patriots , let them stand
the thread that through life 's somber web
rise , and thy sire with these glad tidings greet .
faculties of anger and concupiscence in such a way that by his
fedra hire yonger soster eke ,
evil fate might rise against thee .
one exploit brave
he the sweetest of all singers .
the fostering she - wolf with the twins ; they hung
look on the hands with female slaughter red ;
when at their end , they wonderingly recall
caress with folds and curves
drifting , though he loved her not ,
was this a foretaste of eternal bliss ?
was by the eternal spirit inwreath'd : and when
pearly horizon , climb towards the sun .
i do n't care me for nobodda
jam cum coelitibus ( si modo credis ) eris .
big thoughts our kindred bosoms swell ,
gascony girls or girls of toulouse ;
far off , i hear new insect cries--
they muse in sleepy contentment ,
' t will carry me under your casement ,
me thoghte a fyri lancegay ,
their splendors manifold:--
and , emperor - like , decore
achaians , whom i could recall to mind ,
me hast thou long with might attracted ,
even thetis , the silver - footed ; for very dear wert thou to
as on she sweeps , behind her , fast and thick ,
the horizon of the present and the past ,
a loving welcome o'er these blissful bowers .
slowly and long ;
fear might impel me , never could distrust .
to every bosom dart may influence round ,
verplanck , g. c. , reviews freneau 's poems , i. xci
or , ebbing tremulously ,
softer than silence , stiller than still air
blurring the burnished glamour of the thames
homeward to corinth arion proceeds :
these fashion'd , when i noted well their guise .
in hiding there .
as he thought of escape , but could see no way how ;
i could not hear what he proposed to them ;
among the many stars ?
was bent on me , and from his hand of chalk
truth keeps the bottom of her well ,
methought was curio , from whose throat was cut
of deception , that blindness but seems to make bright ;
now feebly bends she in the blast ,
rob swears he coudna want her ;
si me non ueterum commendant magna parentum
that only makes superior sense beloved .
take ' i m away !   there 's more from the place ' e come .
( cloud of condensed sweets ) and break vpon vs
upon this thrilling tale of love .
the madonnas , tears the cloak
cast with the axe their honours down ,
and further to afford relief ,
one gift that men can give , and that 's a dream ,
for thee that great deliverance wrought .
like the strawberry in spring - time
' twere ill in me to tempt the fates , i trow ;
as if fate his heart had been blighting .
and never more shall covet war with you . "
fortunate and celebrated
comrade americanos ! to us , then at last the orient comes .
for him men demen hoot that men seen swete .
as when a vultur on imaus bred ,
you , or me , or death--
the day that they fractured the ' record ' to dover !
the lovers met in twilight and in stealth .
" o souls so cruel ! that the farthest post
  the house - spider conceals itself in a cell , which is constructed
" what ! can these dead bones live , whose sap is dried
and the dripping wall is high ,
deeply in their bitter grief
the spacious sheet , and stretch it to the wind .
ten thousand years . "
those who win heaven , blest are they !
he poured the drink offering in his house , that the ship
who 's coming now across the brook ?
in tiny patterned state ,
by the wretched , by the senseless -- by the lost to every joy ,
again the buds asleep within the tomb ;
to find king agramant 's rogero there ,
wher non schal be bot ye and i. "
the voice from the house fades far away ,
stonden for nought , and wepen out your sighte ?
keen as are the arrows
you lift me into immortality ,
to heaven 's angelic chant .
with every word some torturing dream is born ;
to the high halls of morning , pearly white ,
some smile from heaven , in waves of light ,
like a broken honey - comb .
and leave his people free , is mine : a throne
us mortals , saintlike , holy , pure ,
my thought travels backward and reaches the day
and far beyond there we descend the crag . "
the scripture stands true -- and that i am firm in ,
within the breast of a noisome pool)--
to meet him in the woods , as though a flame had flashed .
and seeing thus the constable dismayde :
toll the bell ! toll the bell !
till his skull was crushed to pieces .
his mangled steeds and driver die ;
we seem the same , though changing still ,
page of the chamber of emily the bright ;
to lay them at the public 's skirt .
to his deare brother colonel f[rancis ] l[ovelace ]
scattering up the crooked air .
but forth the father ’s anguish broke ,
man picked out of ten thousand .
for thought he from bechelaren / to take departure presently .
that changed the child 's heart in the man ,
and efte busched to þe abyme , þat breed fysches ,
some years afterwards ( 1716 and 1717 ) he published two volumes of
shall separate forever ; swift hath sped
e'en if thou slay me , deem not to obtain
at last her earnest suit the duke denayed ,
to chase folks that are so much bigger ' n you .
and tried to think , as they were taught ,
the fogs are fleeces far to waft ,
will ye no come back again ?
the poor are prolific ; we 're not afraid ;
all nature laughs and jeers and chaffs
tho ' turned astray is sunshine still !
fancy shoes that never fit her ! "
but the worker passed onward unblessed and weak
and make we not requital , / our shame for aye it were ;
but hunger of new viands tempts his flock ,
spreading its arms to embrace with inexhaustible bounty
that i should be thinking , right there ,
but you and i are not yet two old women ,
the pointz of schrifte how that thei stonde . "
" turnus , what no one of the gods might promise , didst thou seek ,
my thoughts to home , and you , were giv'n .
we have mice , too , in plenty ,
until new sculptured lilies came to life
when e'er i see those smiling eyes .
the fingers , who , in wild hope to escape
by nilus head , enclos'd with shining rock ,
nodding plumes where she alights ,
in the long way that i must tread alone ,
the star - crowned night in her sable plumes
look'd around her from the white - wall'd fortress :
he could not help but mark ,
thus gladly would he forward press toward the goal .
where hope and he part company , --
and , if my lips be musicless , inspire
with a haw bayberry kame ?
as be ensample thou myht wite ,
to sport and play with the delighted hours ,
and grumbled when i made him stop .
across the lake the skaters
and bored through his breastplate strong and thick ,
of shattering war , and fling red misery
when sunrise through the cold white mist is breaking ,
of venus , who s condicioun
sprung from the gods ' high line , why barest thou me
slinks back , like a thief , to his lair :
make the northland hills re - echo
deep sworn to solemn secrecy ,
we 'll burn the fathers ' weighty tomes ,
and , swearing ( not alone by heaven ) ,
the year is dying in the night :
the longest night must have an end
officious grooms stand ready by his side ;
through the heart , and through the liver ,
and amid celestial splendors
beating and hammering .   he was so dear ,
will not grow bright and clean .
let there be none , not one , on earth to bless,--
v. 67 .   that to the eye of man . ]   " that the ways of divine
through love , though all the wisdom of the world
and prais'd the just resentment of the maids .
are fanes men rear to other deities ;
and vaunt deeds dignified by time
she and i no more , but in one .
with none to chase him in his chariot whirl'd .
for i am the person who wrote them , and surely to god , i know !
i enter'd in . outside the darkness was
to the holy light ,
and he still more by whom they were brought .
with the roll of his fat off the cliff .
there did they fitting service / for the lofty queen provide .
listen all the stars of heaven ,
however feebly .   do then -- act away !
then moving up the coast they landed him ,
" i want , " said he , " a -- you know what
and the small ripple spilt upon the beach
the singer is undoubtedly beneath
we wander out , we know not where ,
but , between love , and wine , and sleep ,
that he schal spede upon his riht ,
his giant form bent double . far and nigh
sweeter than they had heard before ,
where lincoln prayed ! what passion had his soul--
the bustling housewife stirred the kitchen fire ;
her choral sports , and whence the sun ascends .
cold is it beneath thy fur - robes ,
of doing good and of enduring ill ,
a pause : i stand and see
let but an ezra rise anew ,
he soon laid his hand on his trusty harpoon ;
over the balustrade has bounced
our steeds are weary and spent with pain ;
marsac at adventure rides ,
peering to spy a goat - track down the cliff ,
crawls he like a worm of magic ,
my mem'ry only misses
and well performs such office as the eye
quodsi dolentem nec phrygius lapis
faith , gospel , all , seemed made to be disputed , & c.
to sweat in harness through the road ,
when i see in the ruins of a suit
and mr . owl , the baritone ,
and the towers of saint cuthbert were stirred by the shout![bb ]
this morning they tell me that so - and - so is dead .
thus dissipate and quench the soul 's ethereal fire ! "
thoughtless host of darksome northland ,
and we are strong enough to bear it .
i heard my achates complain
no other soul was in the place
howls to the moonless sky ,
" _ have you a penny for bob ? _ "
( god bless the thought ! )
sounds , as if some fair city were one voice
about the sea - encompassed land .
the lordliest of trees ,
the effervescent fizz ; and wondrous spells
and stronger than all storms that range for prey .
with his white little breast and his white little paws
long , long stood he , king diderik ,
to axe ? " and thus hire innocence
nor e'er compare thee with the prince of ind . "
lord indra ’s self the onset led .
" this ship is so crank and walty
barr steenie!^10 wi'people that ken ye nae better .
the path through the woods , where as lovers we wandered ,
with her phials of perfume round her ,
you know , and that which thereunto is good . "
of the fan that she held to her face ;
tho myhten finde no reles
sche wolde noght hirselven stille ,
but the earthly king was crowned with gold--
inch and ' arf an inch she went , but never gained a yard :
which gives him life and strength renewed ,
ennobler of thy nature , so advanc'd
until that day drew nigh ;
" not so , " quod i ; " let baser things devize
" thus i use god 's silken bandage ,
with parted lips and outstretched hands
whose sticky buds glimmer and are half - burst open
“ to prove deserting nestor was no shame :
not from the centre of the sea so far
strike white hands softly ' gainst the rocky heads .
seldom , but all their words were tuneful sweet .
the touch of earthly years .
arrange them here in ranks , before your face . "
for i am here , half way of my journey ,
gave them longings and ambitions ,
that nothing could be used to turn them both to gain ;
in virtue firm , and obstinately just ,
both to the question ask'd , and to the wish ,
while the ryebread i am eating ,
thomson 's bashfulness or pride , or some other motive perhaps not
and closde her eyes with carelesse quietriesse ;
dear ladies you will heasy tell--
--good,--said the master , and laughed a hearty terrestrial laugh .
and the bell at morn
nos sumu ' romani , qui fuvimus ante rudini .
too often late for dinner .
a conqueror rise , whate'er betide .
are so slender and young that they can not keep still ,
alter ? when the hills do .
in the air a greater text of light ;
that he didna ken his neebor 's wife
taking another ,
to top a ball around the ladies ' course !
hath clothed thy form with dignity divine .
" afin que cette application vous forcât à penser à autre chose .
exerted on the cheese its force ,
he advanced before i could well retire ;
no camouflage patriotism--
than the blade within thy scabbard . "
it seems unkind to look her way ;
_ it had not risen ; one could see _
wrath to the shaft 's head strained the bow .
lifts her forehead from the waters ,
and in its image it transformed itself .
old mother occleve sobbed ; her white head hung
and now there came o'er the perturbed waves
fulfils completion in a dreamy guess :
then his eyes chanced upon his banner - bird ,
by ceaseless depredations on a life
soft i raise my drowsy head ,
and it is good to cheat the pair , and gibe ,
i marked the answer : " plead no more thy vain excuse to me ;
go by , as i look from my window .
over his brother ’s wide domain .
and through its gate , borne like a bugle blast ,
with the cold fire
and where we had our supper - fire
a voice of crystal soars ,
and saw ye each the head - band / with fair hand move aside
" ah ! wherefore does the northern conqueress stay !
you hour ! from me you ever take your flight ,
-- " perfidious , was it not enough ( she said )
come nagging along and be making me jump ?
idolatrous spike under my eyes , and so i will tell mool raj . let
o glory of our kind ! beseech thee say
what though it cost him all his gain . she gave it ,
would god that i might straddle mutiny
all i feel is love , and hope , and gladness .
i fear that we shall be waylaid ,
plants a sly bruiser on the nose of bob ;
the lady left for dragon 's meat
the angel sent the stars to you .
coming to meet me ; for far was already the band of the exiles .
men are of two kinds , and he
though ' tis springtime , fanny mine ,
abash'd philosophy , that dog survey !
with the shrapnel right in their face ,
what more eggs were with the _ two _ .
come from your palaces , come from your hovels !
we welcome what we wrought for through the past ,
that so ourselves may render to our dead
not counsel aspirations high ,
a maid to see her sparrow part ,
good spirit .   if of thee charon complain ,
" as ye deal with my contemners , so with my grace shall deal ;
or if the rites of heaven were there display'd .
law to our selves , our reason is our law .
and the creatures and the elements renew their covenanting .
maddens along the wide gulfs of the deep ,
storm from sea and land ,
his golden pinions quiver ;
then he smiled , and said : " to - morrow
destacándose va , del horizonte ,
we are assaulted on all sides
which none but tyrants and their slaves have trod ,
angel or devil ?
while hatred springs in her passionate heart ,
which in round drops upon their whiteness stood .
where the water meets the sands ,
that in the worlds opinion it was thought ,
you may be stripped of all you have -- it may be all you say ,
and first in the morning , and last at night
and mourn not me
to the slings upon the yard .
lifts his colossal form , and towers along ;
they have gone bleeding , stumbling forth , and died
the wealth of coloured lights that pass
then sprang from many a rock - strewn field
blasted trees and willow streamers ,
' tis passing meet to make good cheer
took much , and to the pylians gave the rest
throw down my bed and sleep , while all
have i lain with stifled breath ;
as i went down by hastings mill i heard a fellow singing ,
shall woman fail ? i come , my love , to thee !
then at peace , and crowned with glory ,
i 'll hew him down e'er the vision flyeth ,
you 've hurt him !
so nestle close your bonnie head , and close your eyes so true ,
but ah ! the night is cold ,
all kinds and sorts o ' games an ' sports ,
no , she is athirst and drinking up her wonder :
i pushed from my window the curtaining vine ,
" nought have i done , to - morrow a new thing . "
the house of ,
and silent on earth 's breast ;
to glory and to slaughter ?
but as daily bread is all i need , i do not much regard her , o.
goodliest and greatest of price . i will give thee a mixing
and the father of lies ! ' "   when he had spoke ,
lays no more his snares of copper ,
though the vext chymick vainly chases
to hear .
a r*k*r is complete perfection ,
ilk ither gi'en ,
will to the giants ’ island lead
not mealy . have ready the cream dressing . this is made by rubbing
amisisse , iterum cui peperisse fuit .
“ his senses seem'd restor'd . what is't you do ?
she had put off her dress ; and she look'd to his eyes
as if there were n't enough to dust a flute
and frequent smiles unbidden came ,
whether it feels
much disheartened , spake as follows :
" now violate liberty , time being bad ,
he rode seven days through fair england
if that sche be noght in the weie ;
then thus again gerenian nestor spoke :
then shall thou speed thy messengers / to worms across the rhine .
what had we you desired ?
so i behold her and forget my tears . "
in country dances still i bore the bell .
and dress with hurried hands her wreaths again .
possumus aequo animo , nec memmi clara propago
where the ground with seed is planted ,
no cinderellas -- many a juno--
alone and merry at forty year ,
disappointment in a wish that cumae might never produce a poet
sure a hall is no place
worthily may make his entrance .
of wandering swain the white - winged plover wheels
at least , the sceptre lost , i still should reign
no want , no famine , the glad natives know ,
but i 'm too clumsy fer a dancer .
owe this great benefit to the worship of which chivalry was the
how calm it was!--the silence there
and thou wert still a hope , a love ;
with links unfastened did remain ,
of life and death . to proue the word
his pipe , and struck the gamut higher .
the idea of pouring out a libation to the gods .   later it
and so , despite thy caution or thy tears ,
you kneeled at the window - ledge
staggering to take the pledge of brotherhood ,
jimmy said nothing in reply , but thought
i ask you but to blossom from my dust .
þat wo nt watȝ whyle deuoyde my wrange ,
finds his way to ithaca goes to my mistress and tells her
for each fair hope by grief is crossed
of kings and clowns in a merry plight ,
as not to make the ' offence excusable .
' tis charlie of the strong appeal ,
robes wherewith livia was herself attired ,
a whip , so small you could not see it .
unto everlasting hell ! "
chart the ulterior firmament ,
let us on every side the mob invade ,
who round him run in play .
so clean , the semblance did not alter more .
ah ! thou wert fairer than the early morn ,
so me , for your instruction , god inspires . "
turban and the lank folds of white drapery falling from his high
" through thicket and wood , go hunt him ,
the very flowers were still as we .
the climbing wood - bine , clipping all these bowers ,
i was quite strong -- at least they said so--
æneas therefore , as it seems , himself
and live untroubled by woes and fears
listening to your light good - bye ,
tlachco , xiv , 10 . the place of the ball play .
listen again . one evening at the close
treatises on general redemption . " ]
moaned the other , ' they are thrown
our places with your human kind ,
but she stood there as chuff as a mawmet,(5 )
flank , and apparently very much irritated about something , put a
to what point that it schal be drive .
when i touch the flying vesture ,
what wonder if our step betrays
and the hot lead pour down like rain
a stillness in that place .
i catcha da birda , i getta da tree ,
" must we , with fruitless labour , strive ,
from bad to worse it shifted.--cephas came ;
till the pond seemed full of beavers ,
laws feared in peace ; want by the sword removed ;
charis , his spouse , a grace divinely fair ,
thus compass'd we , a segment widely stretch'd
sing hers the culture sweeter than rain
and soft received me on their silver breast .
where yet i 'd be had i but heavenly wings .
unless thou combat for it now with me . "
if thou hast heard my call ,
t ' explore the world , and search the ways of life ,
our choice requires the coolest head ;
above that floating mane we missed
are those twain to - day that seek thy presence .
the shrieking rout with hookèd feet about the prey doth fly ,
pierce our bodies , our hearts and our two wills
the sea , tarentum 's city , as i hear .
because they hope some time , though now in fire ,
and to use our hands for steering . "
for , etc .
is fraught with terror to an anxious wife :
they wriggled their tails ,
my faithful heart is free entier
sweet , wisdomless charity , sowing the seed
and beaded drops course   down his writhen brow ! "
due adoration , thus began to adore ;
and wonder at a startled face that penetrates my own .
attaineth to erase those fancy - scrawls
and why so huge the granite ?
but foist'st us off
our country - swains in the morris dance
so when the mother , bending o'er his charms ,
of delightful sound ,
stood and beheld me .
virtue 's rewards can mortal pencil paint ?
lines longer than 78 characters are broken according to metre ,
urges the other , sounding ting ! ting ! with such sweet
justice conquers evermore ,
and what it now behoves me to retrace
among the flowers of summer with her maid ,
saw us alight .
at night my roof th ' open sky -- my pillow th ' cold ground .
sitka 's beauty is the steel
and glancing downwards , near his flank descends .
thine shall submit ; he over thee shall rule .
across the seas , where once the farmsteads poured
delusions of the days that once have been ,
et mentem uincire toris ac iungere festa
the hasty blood in guilty red would speak
and _ f_ared to the _ f_ight ,      _ f_orth in right order ,
here 's prick'd i ' blood a maiden 's prayer ,
and poured her sorrow to the winds , when lo ,
sil - ver bells and coc - kle shells ,
and teaze the grass - hid larks from getting rest .
to dogs their flesh been thrown !
with heart upon each tale intent ,
( ll . 750 - 762 ) " blithe be thy heart within thy breast !   for here
pin 's head , and i have seen about ten of them on each cabbage
' tis true they whisper mournfully
that seem'd things dead and dead again , drew in
torrent sayd : aeuro ~ be marry dere ,
scared by i know not what ; and in his heat
her , of winged things the swiftest . even thus she lightly
better the axe than to live on and wage
but in!--at five yards , good , clan holes the ball !
were it thrown in the road , would the case assist ?
nec minus haec nostri notescet fama sepulcri
the meadow green , and breezy hill ,
of ghostly darkenes and of gastlie dreed :
i like the lad ; the work upon his portrait
_ i _ never had a decent coat--
to whom have you surrendered your honour ?
where the seraphs burn in the sun like brands
and threats aloud ! the greeks with longing eyes
displayed ; may all approve ! _
thus , tears and sighs forth gushing , did i burst
wherewith the wind may choose to blow .
the true and lawful heir to th ' crown
with lackeys , hucksters , and the commoner sort ,
his silent council , their deed or slander arraigneth.--
the murmuring of summer seas ,
the victor vanquished , at her feet he fell ,
sounding sea , and have nothing to do with any other people . this
a feather of the blue ,
imprisonment and exile,--for his offense against sir thomas lucy ,
was darkest , and its deepest shadows threw ,
affection sound , and human passions quell .
icilius ! i heard a ringing laugh ,
animusque servaret fidem .
said that chiron , others that polenor , when wounded by the arrow
the end his wishes would obtain;--
wysdome preserueth men in auctoryte
' takes a deadly aim . '
ask the burning , blinded meadows
_ zaccheus in the sycamore - tree . _
man with man must fain unite ;
for i withoute noise or cri
strangers like you that pictured countenance ,
is it i can do ? "
and if it still doth please you to go onward ,
what is unnatural men are adoring ,
huge on the mountain in the wet sea light ,
how have the roses thriven ,
coming from thee , i could not put him back ,
sole : holes are cut at the four corners , and through these holes
where roots and berries will supply
( not for so dire an enterprise design'd ) .
ah ! a fellow - feeling doth make us kind .
desperate attempts to communicate his ecstasy and persuade other
grief from the lonely widow 's cell ;
yet they were of a different kind
that hides her from the day ;
there was a devil in me , at one with me ,
and on that morn , before the fresh may dew
a magic city full of lights begins to glow and
is ráma , unrestrained by rule .
and tirls the branches barely ;
divine associate of the festive board .
you felons on trial in courts ,
yes , you , you only , lady fair ,
like a weary beggar lies
magnanimous , who would have entertain'd
thy wishes , all that in this sphere have birth ,
and whose precipitate endeavour
burn with the glow of these deep - hearted hours .
bright gleamed the rapid lightning ; yet more bright
where to run my airy race .
overwrought by excitement so new :
gazed on their winning loveliness ,
that in us three , lewis and me and you ,
reikjavik has two midwives ,
for here whate'er they ask the swain wil grant ,
he is the substance of all power , the head of all high
had met the shaft ; and then the herald cried ,
there doze o’er _ shakespear _ ; then thy blunders fell
the lavrock , the peasweep , and skirlin ' pickmaw ,
" how can he be repaid--
rolls the caravan along .
a latin and greek , praise god , are we , armenian and copt ,
thereafter come to our house , and quickly fall to feasting ;
is the big eddy , whose deep bottom none
which writes thy spouse 's radiant name
my soul cried strongly out to you
whilst , to make the most of you , as rivals we 'll strive :
divisions of a digressive poem . see his cath - loda , vol . 2 of
and fiercely he rode to the castle
rushing back in wrong direction .
to get him some beer ,
slow culture 's toil .   where is good liziohere
which hath no hope that clings to it , the closer as it dies ,
and the snows that seventy winters bring
in light of god 's pure peace he would have all learning glow ,
irradiate , there plant eyes , all mist from thence
were furbished up to seem like rituals .
some weariness in guarding such a life ,
until he came to susie pye ,
some will talk of bold robin hood ,
turn to bed before the hour ; even too much sleep is
in you i trust , and in the heavenly powers ,
a fellow could not fail to pay
noo to the hoastin ' rookery swells ,
dream faces bloom around your face
he faced me , reeling in his weariness ,
accepted as a proof that catullus had actually witnessed the
what the fine chain that link'd the floating measure ?
meek , placable , and ever kind ,
to princes i sang in a loftier tone
ere the parting hour go by ,
to find his peace , and comes to swarga 's gate .
the porch deposed the ghastly heap of death .
turn all its silver sides and tremble into song .
that o’er these trackless waters boldly glide .
maist . most .
and we gazed and dreamed ,
silence ! attend ! to me give ear !
since forth of thee thy family hath gone ,
the wood grew up round her castle ,
wet were his cheeks with ever - flowing tears :
olim resumpto praeferocis proelio
ready to aid the two his force he kept ,
far - rolling ere the downright lightnings glare ;
" her speech , " he said , " hath caused this pain .
i the present needs must fear .
that lie before each pillaréd mount ,
his end of being on earth , and mission high .
swift to the shrine -- where on those robes of white
  the seat and gardens of the lord viscount cobham , in
and the tale of ours a score ;
may 1 to nov . 1 . ' plutarch 's lives ' , vol . i to vii , published .
siller , _ silver _ ; _ applied to money in general _ .
beside whose banks our hero learned to dream .
the folk who murdered jesus ?
the roseate wreath the handmaid graces twine
says suddenly : " you 'll have to help my niece ,
obliuiones . est animus tibi
to make game of a king ! '
they left , and summer dresses in new bloom ,
of curious work ; and mounting on his car ,
and the music of her voice
than a man 's frequent fame spoke out with praise .
though rag and pack be on our back
to carry speedy succour to their liege ,
  he had never been to college ,
runs up , and utters these glad sounds :
head to listen:--
c'est a l'écho .
do not decide , unless she tell it thee ,
how he must have cursed our revel !
and love is truest when ' tis newest ,
cum ab his studiis discesserit , etiam ad reliqua vitae
that trails all over it , and to the twigs
substantial joys we sager priests pursue ,
so little to be loved , and thou so much ,
" may laugh the dullest of these shades away .
i 've heard you sing , and may have slept ;
the self - same courage resolute you feel and
tears filled his eyes , he tore his snowy beard .
' mid the eternal hum , the boy clomb up
learned to sing my simple measures ,
to wyse off the busses , or help owre a stran ' ;
among the ferns , where herne the hunter walks ,
i offer this handful of
a bloke was givin ' back - chat to the queen ....
i say , continuing , that long before
where one of satan 's shepherdesses caught
chirrups of the trot afield ,
a needlesse task new fables to contrive ,
their wonted fruit should bear ,
will now all be turned into weeping for thee .
whose boundless mercy gave
and gather the bruised grain ;
earth yields no scents like those ;
o for the bliss that by it
" the mother of true wisdom is the will ; "
a frolic scene of love and fun ,
and came tumbling down the hill !
of brightness ,
tell mother see how metters stood
was falle fro chivalerie ,
that with his eyes he may uplift himself
los heredores de tan gran hazaña .
and side their heedless foes to assail and charge :
back into warlike france the cherished boy .
extends so far , that it meridian makes
to that old track no more confined ,
in partinge of here heritages
and who but listened?--till was paid
the wavelets came dancing to kiss the fair land ,
so she fondly stood beside him ,
of the sea and the brooks and the rivers ,
hei ! - how de deers vere roonin :
jealous and exclusive ; to be less flexible in character and to
make for thee a meal at midday ,
for every sport allows it is a losin ' game to buck
and the watcher who waits by the dim , dark gates
alone gives aid to city charged with sin .
by all for which the martyrs bore their agony and
re - echoing wide , what time the valiant twain
old cybele he would enjoy ,
when i came by the churchyard wall , and halted there
then did my leader speak with such great force ,
hero -- for what is substance to a spirit ?
my wife 's new pink slippers
possets made of elder - blooms .
the cat in gloves catches no mice .
and unto thee i came , as she desired ;
wounding itself to death , rise up and fall ,
led off , their saline pastures far from view :
earth - couched , as one that has no friend ?
draws near the city , that of dis is nam'd ,
and faith 's white blossoms never wave
the queen could almost pillage from the crown ,
and now the mammoth bows the knee ,
catches such rebounds , beware,--
nor yet in wondering your fair lives waste ;
stood , immortal . he whispered--
bent on his sword the unmoved hero stood .
and cause enquiries , that might be
to which the people standing all about ,
sea - born of peleus . "   either poet now
of a dun umbrage hoar , such as is seen ,
that motley clown in arden wood ,
here 's another piece of bread
and its eyes were fiery - glowing ,
longer than the longest rafters ,
one little slab of marble , far away .
shepherd renew their youth amid the pastoral plains of texas
in the bright , fireside , nursery clime ,
mad , my girl , with love for you !
flings men his song white - hot , then back retires ,
if wishes were horses ,
varronemque fuga magnum ? quid dicere prosit
and all the passion that through heavy years
but that some fortunatus ' gift
when words we want , love teacheth to indite ;
death and black fate at their hands , for it is my doom yet
something immodest or unseemly free ?
and hath he such thing boasted , / so shall he let us hear :
so shall our bounties speak a grateful mind ;
his heart swell’d high , and labour’d in his breast ;
that , if i slip , thou dost not fall .
was she too gay in dress to please your mind ,
and let down the hem of her school - girlish dresses
than flee , and live in shame mid alien folk . "
o ' the wean that lies outside .
but filled to the lips with the ardor of youth ,
but just in time was warnised by a look--
waft the leaves that are serest ,
and lasses chanting o'er the pail ,
breathing revenge , in arms they take their way
some sing of each flower in beauty that blows ;
oppose , if thou hast ben such on .
dash the curl'd waves , and waft the guileful train :
you shall hear how pau - puk - keewis ,
( _ only works which translate at least thirty lines are noted . _ )
of the hills of french lorraine ,
lays a wreath of remembrance
millions of lilies mix'd with roses .
ho ! for our care - free childhood !
but my quick eye might reach not to the depth
and prothoon ; menelaus , through the flank
all of us know that lance , and well may speak
the images of such humility ,
but come ! ... o bride of embraces twined like an octopus !
it would be like a story in a book .
by sleight of hand we haste to save
sound , sound the horn ! to the hunter good
now dim , and with fresh billets piled them high ,
see them not in all your lifetime ,
save that there was weeping for friends belov'd so well
dulcet - eyed as ceres ' daughter ,
nunc decet aut uiridi nitidum caput impedire myrto
for neither gallant barks nor friends had he
as sandalled dusk goes by .
_ chorus : _ alive ! not dead ! tho ' behind his head
with heart and lips of purity ,
till the news of her hiding got vent .
for thy wife my fairest maiden ,
the hand , first gift of heaven ! to man belongs ;
a mery thynge is mesure and easy to sustayne
cheek on cheek !
anew ; and wooing in his fond boy 's way ,
anywhere , anywhere
and greets them as beloved friends ,
him ; there his monument is still to be seen , and there of old , on
grass from off the flowerless meadows .
rapine and murder , link'd , now prowl for prey .
the flowers smile up to him from their low seats .
that daily coming , and must hear the goat
and here 's the mode occurs to _ me_:--
there 's turf behind the _ ludovisi _ .
in troublous days of anguish and rebuke ,
thereto sir lancelot answered , ' it is well :
happy are all who reach that shore ,
now from the east the wheeling shade appears
unhappy , sad exchange ! what , must i buy
he saw the country lie , his men o'erthrown ,
in him was none ; for that high providence ,
in these fair fields unfading flowers abound ,
as to the pipe of pan ,
were on her trembling lips and sweet .
my father , by your strokes my mother slain !
" house ! _ je vous n'entends pas , monsieur . _ "
if thou hast ravished what thou couldst , wealth , friends ,
sweet sentimentalist , invite
all these
i will share my kingdom with you ,
thou horrid bird of hateful strain ! ”
of man 's corruption and of adam's - falling ,
there is a wood where the fairies dance
of everlasting penalties -- if broke .
in his emergence to exonerate
is pestered with a mood and figure bride !
nor weariness o ’ days .
far and wide the oars resounded ,
and timidly she glanced around ,
what is a charm , if never seen ?
striking the electric chain wherewith we are darkly bound ;
take these as fellows of thy fate : go forth the walls to see ,
unto men of strange speech , even to temesa , { * } in quest of
nor thence be missed the speary heads
who now had burnt with fire the grecian ships ,
no trade upon the street
for now this place was sanctified !
let the trees mean thee , and the grassy sod ,
and splendours , with her birth begun ,
spirit of russia , now has come
song - deliverer of northland ,
" without one victim to our shades ,
brings from the dust the sound of liberty !
kept up among the guests , discoursing low
` " twas no small joy ' mid all the woes , that . '
cinna , the great venusian told
who shall advise , this bidding be not done ,
" i would not check your bounding mirth ,
" what a naughty child ! "
your innocence and charms have saved your life !
' without there 's something amiss .
while bow and falchion feed the flame .
a growing burden . mean while warr arose ,
and a cradle .
with all its solemn imagery , its rocks ,
and suffered death , but could not die .
i see , lest nature in her part should tire . "
it had so sweet a breath ! and oft
you 'd give him -- poison shall we say ?
and haply may as well have wearied you ;
deil mak his king's - hood in spleuchan !
fairest , noblest , best of all ,
his love he told , that made me bold
the sickle hand is reaping
and grief shall endure not for ever , i know .
for earth wearies of them , and god 's over all !
where crystal streams by flowery margents flow ,
some stars will rise and wane ,
wove it by rote as theretofore ,
drove from privernum , for his deeds of shame .
that beautifies its paradise !
to strip the brook with mantling cresses spread ,
and said " o sea , why are you blue ?
also giov . villani hist . i. vii . c. 40 .
prescribed her heights , and pruned her tender wing ,
comes forth from dunolly , a star reappearing ;
when liberty return'd : but in too few
when i walked roseless tracks and wide ,
from the great magician , ukko :
of earth to smoulder , there the vital heat
( the terror of the tyrant crew )
the princess sings :
moulding her mighty fates ,
is old , and elde is ful of coveityse ,
for the unscented fictions of the loom ;
ah ! who shall flush with rose 's flame
she stoopeth now into the vale ,
shouted aurelian , as the monarch fled ;
" hurrah for ' johnson 's boy ! ' "
one day of dandelions ' heads
what popular breath her coming does out - tell
he who for the first time loves ,
as waves some pine , with all its storm of boughs ,
here am i on my knees , praying .
tarsus , my city , where the cydnus flows--
there gathered a gloom around their glee--
haste , guests , and own your visitant divine ;
and sung by the myriads that sport through the sky .
untimely ! when thy reason in its strength ,
the weight of mountains on her breast :
losing some men , for she shoots out all her heads at once , and
ere nature finish'd half she had begun .
athwart whose bowl one red cloud streams ,
then long the long oars idle lay .
i have but children two .
the rush , the race , the storm of life ,
my own dear child , my only boy ,
ne'er wound but in play :
but to man he said ,
ah ! how impressionless and cold !
saw his fierce eye - balls flashing red ,
lest you should think he never could recapture
as only she might do , and to her chief
when over dizzy steeps we go
i sing the body electric ,
polyte , or eek the troian daun ripheo ,
still the landscape looks dim through the fast flowing tear . "
of course i want one more favor . if you have any influence with
or the mournful surges
of limbs as blonde as autumn boughs ,
to a black - wolf on the mountains ,
but surely somewhat small for two!"--
like planets in a league to blot
can not leave thee now with gladness ,
then slowly falls--'tis i who feel that touch .
will you , master , yet once more ,
seduces daughters , wives , and mothers ,
his choice bits with ; then in a trice
but the band now redoubles its loud din ,
work with shovels at the snow ;
would seem a children 's game for our delight .
" _ send then thy soul through the invisible
soon as the twilight through the distant mist
that they stand not beside count roland then ,
for the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name lenore--
do por ventura la engañosa dafne ,
but pleas'd with darkest deeds ;
no doubt the system is quite right!--
and is there naught of her ; no token--
thou sprung of fantolini 's line ! thy name
you who ever heard
nor thy wisdom lost in ether . "
i myself have plenty of them .
then we enter the next evening
¡ déte el profeta favor !
when i was a boy , a little boy ,
of stones precipitated from the towers ;
león and imitated him in paraphrases of the psalms . the
by lucifer , as traitor to his throne ;
and seven english towns .
by the blind world , which thinks the talent rare .
unbeloved , unseen in the ebb of twilight ,
and welcome you my vis - a - vis .
he never would disclose , but from that hour
or other passion wring thee .   search thy neck ,
defending their villages against their enemies , and keeping
when joyous harp did there resound
and the notes of pleasure follow .
still shall unthinking man substantial deem
and the soul can lie down to a sweet sleep of peace !
and artful thus pronounced the speech design’d :
of heavenly robes and wreaths divine .
earth in numberless blades of grass and breaks into tumultuous
that never fade , suspense i walk'd , and yet
such was the work expected : there remained
" that every soul is judged true and well
gone , gone,--sold and gone ,
far off she hears his cry : her zeal
wandered eastward , wandered westward ,
and not desdayne ye of your benygnyte
at fame , their idol . call ' t a worthless thing ,
which makes the aggravation greater .
in the heart of the garden the merry bird chants ;
midst such surroundings grey .
the way - worn ladies rested / now on board right pleasantly .
dumfries , where there were pleasant walks on the solway - side , and
foam - necked it floated forth o'er the waves ,
on other prey than his torn limbs infix .
pelicans were winging .
across gold - sprinkled meads -- the merry swarm
which gives out flame , yet it its whiteness shines
transfixed with shafts in every limb ,
" liege lord ! my father guided the ship
of everything .
eu’r leben ihr wagtet in wassertiefen ,
he slew , how he quelled hector , how he haled
  _ nessus _ : slain by hercules with a poisoned arrow . when dying he
and gives a sure hope , at the end of his days
and from the depth of his full heart he sighed .
what shocks one part will edify the rest ,
the whole creation . henceforth in my name
still kept his spirits up -- at least his face ;
please god , not i , for any such .
now at the last , when the shadows begin to grow long , something
but now i know between my god and me
little heed i what they say ,
or death , perchance , e'en now each tie may sever !
an ' he driv ' em all aboard de ark ,
and grasps the slackened bow .
mouths of those engaged in song . _ "
do n't you see the ousemaids ( pooty pollies and maries ) ,
laughter and love and singing everywhere ;
through the forest dark and damp ,
a strange knee rustle through her secret reeds ,
her hair with wheat
to strengthen feeble posts which succours claim ;
representation of life . since we have quoted browning 's apparent
if lords should know no law , as erst you spoke ,
whence the brains for this foul creature ?
waves mute appeal and sore ,
the power to feed their needy pride , }
oh , mirk , mirk was the misty cloud ,
each thought of me that comes o’er thee
reading his office he rode to the town .
only his death could have hindered him , is sufficient to show how
uriel , for thou of those seav'n spirits that stand
justice , the avenger , rise .
pygmalion , sculptor - lover .   now are these ,
" dost thou not crush the reptile ? even so ,
that , more than half their length , they there emerge ,
" for far - off fowls hae feathers fair ,
i stand , like a worshipper , mute
whan daniel this swevene herde ,
under its wings victorious , charlemagne
airn her own livin ' too .
in the blue lake the sky , o'er - reaching far
he eats and hath indigestion ,
" five hundred dollars ! "
with a deep stillness not to be told ,
somwhat of that i wolde mene ;
or , where the beetling cliff o'erhangs the deep ,
a star has nodded through
shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne ,
i wished her my farewell before she closed the door .
enough of pomp and state
only what my heart believed .
harmless lucretia , marking what he tells
come and see her as she stands ,
close under snow - clad summits where they gleam
the causes of her wrath , the pangs of wounded pride,--
creator wise , that peopl'd highest heav'n
pedro c.   good reasons , good , substantial reasons all !
the orange tints that gild the greenest bough ,
substantive and adjective . _ purpura -- purpureus . _ we make purple
life lieth ever sick , death 's writhing thrall ,
pierce ; hence the word " drill , " to bore .
the braces ; one from deck the lumber cast ,
for thee their choicest wreaths prepare ,
in ruddy currents throughout all their frame ,
or , whether led by science , ye retire ,
some other maid and rudely break
that it is mexican blood which makes the clothes on our
the only slave of toil and care ,
w'en i goes to die , nobody mus'n ' cry ,
in soft , ungoaded death ! and ah , suppose
with my thought of her .
the cotter 's saturday night
who else has to keep the house from the shape - changers till day ?
our good swords dipping free ;
quid dubitas quin omni ' sit haec rationi ' potestas ?
but finds himself pusht instantly away ,
" we come , sir , to weep where young wolfe tone is laid ,
is this to slumber in ; on such a couch
" oh , my loved mistress , thou whose spirit still
these the words ainikki utters :
with a curse of its own
the gravest wisdom of the wise ,
how 's my boy ?                  _ sydney dobell _
in the oak he maketh pictures
for where he was hid he must catch ev'ry word ) ,
it sleeps without a sign of life ; it is as good as dead .
clever ,
larger than usual , as a very large temple or a very large
rough is the road , your wheel is out of order--
( see the " confessio goliae , " in _ latin poems attributed to walter
to him my guide exclaim'd : " perchance thou deem'st
and sink their ships or scatter them astray ,
'cause al ai n't here no more !
from floating tresses of glow - worm light ,
how thin they are and sere !
the vision of which i miss ,
o lodger in the sea - kings ' halls ! couldst thou but understand
enlights the present , and shall warm the last ;
thy look on me reverteth , was the beam
of all the gods below , above ;
and a great wife to you , barney mcgee !
true to his calling , the tempests impend ;
as he stepped in front once more ,
berni has made a sportive application of these lines , in his orl .
and the spell has made us one
the heavenly coursers with the flowing manes :
than all that i have gained since then
her mistress she doth give demure good - morrow ,
and if there 's a little bit of woman - love with it ,
" wait and call again .
of that bright wanderer from the olympian sky ,
in this world 's sweets , be - dulled , be - deviled--
oh you who toil and suffer ,
decide , then i am willing to abide by your decision . "
the day had sunk and vanish'd ; ' twas gloom and darkness all .
fell from my eyes and i could see,--
through mansions dim and vast ,
for all to be seen
judging by what they take , and what they pay .
like a four - sided wedge
atrides in his chariot shall attend ;
and then , in low and tremulous tones , she told
in the great world . men hearkened to her words ,
thou and thy wicked crew ! there mingle broils ,
and flying is not yet invented .
save one vain man , who is not in the grave--
how i wad mourn when it was torn
when passing by a splendid dome of pride
with spain , against him , up to the deadly hilt ,
disconsolate he wanders on the coast ,
the german painter , busch , of erfurt , wrote ,
love - gifts of carnival signoras .
wildly it dashes now ,
seek not thy honour here ;
about a year after this , keats went with his friend brown on a
and life most sweet , as heart to heart
and glimpse the brightness and the bliss within ,
on the lake that borders pohja ,
to keep me in your memory .
they never saw how seasons run ,
are moist -- and the dame 's , and both daughters ' .
and as it were of goddes sonde ,
and venus herself shines less ... "
our hair grows grey , our eyes are dimm'd , our heat is tamed ;
year . whether by proxy or in person , however , he received his
which arise on the glass of the sage ,
we should feel that they were winging
con un algo de wáshington y mucho de nemrod .
and the faithful love of a life requite .
brief as a sigh -- and cease .
while the colors turn . but oh ,
loiters in the dainty room
of her , the lowest and the last ;
a castle - builder , with his wooden blocks ,
but when the surprise ,
' mid pillared trophies of barbaric wars ,
but let me fill and drink at pleasure--
still meet the living god .
pessuli , heus pessuli , vos saluto lubens ,
as each year hurries by , let it join that procession
oft cheer'd the shepherds round their social hearth ;
but that thwart thing betwixt us twain ,
in building him a monument ,
i know the darkest deep
ye've the figure , ' tis true , ev'n your foes will allow ,
_ papist _ and _ protestant _ the coursers twain ,
believes high heaven , whence favours flow ,
so proud she was to die
with dark foreboding ; and the lily 's cup
whan that ther was of chois non other :
maria ( with a forced laugh ) .
is prov'd , that free to change society
then it is that half of the truth which , at this moment , it
with here and there a little bit
i with justice have reason to be truly proud . "
this wanton witch of evil fame ,
i took my bath , an ' i wallered -- for , gawd , i needed it so !
_ good folk , we present you _
of mortals , the most cherish'd by the nine ,
from the station he so lately left with a swag upon his back .
came unto me together with its meaning
loud - crashing , terrible , a sound that made
vales , where mists still shift and play ,
their names are writ as destined to succeed .
naked sincerity and simple goodness ; we move
a whirlwind sprung , and at her foremost side
o life , be idle and let love come in ,
from the fine poetical head of reynolds , would not suspect ; and
gitche gu'mee , the big - sea - water ,
whose soul was such poor stuff as could not mast
why you missed last night , and must now away
joys hath she , too , joys thin and bright ,
his knightly host made answer , “ may
then shall my bounteous grace thy pardon seal .
comes bleating till him , owre the knowe ,
after that , for 120 winters , duly numbered , exile
equestrian skill .
upon the lonesome wild .
miss flora had grown so enormously stout
that eye which looks on her confounds his wits ;
in the white aspens sad winds sing ;
where the starv'd sinners pine . '   if thou be ask'd
wrote verse of praise , or prayer for good to come ,
and filling it once more with human soul ?
of all the bores of every sect ,
and i sit far apart ,
bright are your bowers and balmy their breath ,
as sunshine broken in the rill
scarcely a telegraph could wag
not only they the dame and martial gear ,
no gaudy wreath of flowers she weaves ,
skeered , _ scared _ .
the worlds with wealth of life ! o treasure - claimer ,
come , lend your inspiration now ,
ride through the castle gate and disappear .
i am the light within the sun ,
for calling up that spot of joy .   she had
he bears aloft the golden standard ,
the pretty face that thrilled my soul when i was mary 's beau .
but it 's a horror to fear on the pathways of love you 'll discover
each helpless bianco prostrate to the ground .
es para ganar aquel
is it not said that many years ago ,
if e'er again he cheat his leal goodwife ,
what creatures shall we then appear ,
to the i haue fuaesaes good gate ;
sewed a sekke þer abof , & syked ful colde ;
i will paint all this , rumseller ,
who ever saw a rabbit
it is the prison - house of lille !
his variant of spenserian stanza , 108 .
assurance that he was a man in whom learning and the ardent
that runs so icy clear ;
burnt out with burning iron,--as supplies
e'en what his words declare : or else to shun
within my breast youth 's throbbing pulse is bounding ,
large compensation was from elis due .
the knees of those two carved and gilded youths
then robin he brought him thorow the wood ,
to issue , and reflected upwards rise ,
let this your preservation be ;
he leaves untasted the first fruits of joy ;
and the spring comes slowly up this way . _
of this ' history ' , hitherto supposed to have been written in
but when great hecate made me queen of that avernus land ,
tho ' the sea , where thou embarkest ,
ten hundred shaven priests did bow to ammon 's
the lioness chafes in her lair ,
he will never lie on his couch awake ,
we 'll keep god 's laws , and have no cause
understood that most of his great deeds are a gorgeous fabric of
he cries and is gone ; but they know the worst--
and the world 's best smiles are given to the victors in the fray .
when he found thought again . " the man who sees
jesters from the courts of kings
for gloomy clouds then broke and fled away .
hope comes to _ youth _ , gliding thro ' azure skies
the reckonings for the life of men are twain :
what death with loue should haue to doe ;
for others ' sake .   but tell me , if thou know'st ,
me who bring naught to thee who all things gave ?
with powers to please thee ; not of passive ply
i knew the mountain - goddess , liberty ,
sterile and vain the tributes which we pay--
suwarrow chiefly was on the alert ,
quis non argolico defleuit pergamon igni
as the spindle used in suomi ,
but his speech no answering echoes woke ,
at their grave order and their humble song ,
and straight the trunk exclaim'd : " why pluck'st thou me ? "
upon that barren waste of sand ,
struck by an arm unseen , it burst in two ;
his gait and his waddle were held as a model
oh let this cup pass from me !   nevertheless
like some prophetic bard tuning the lyre ?
he drives his chariot , there arose a night
but who in his power
born to an unloved father , loved me not ,
yet , ' tis not helm or feather--
knacker 's twist ,
by this rude warrior 's magnanimity .
by the hearth - stone
casydoynes , & crysolytes , & clere rubies ,
if thou hadst a hundred vessels ,
o , say , shall it be mead or wine ? ”
of all thou canst , this is the greatest ,
held a rich bundle of those rags
and who will suckle him by and bye ?
the friendless bodies of unburied men .
an hour since , and what mark of me remains ?
rising , flying , soaring , sailing ,
y tú un serafín :
an idol ?   man was born to worship such !
but with no friendly voice , and add thy name ,
but only david borrow
high hopes that burned like stars sublime
nor the flocks upon my pastures . "
and here young rabbits leap .
" the prince at once acknowledged that the route i
who hast with life imbued
and hurls for him , o half hurls earth for him off
the star - dust that is whirled aloft and flies
attention from her own intrigue . cephalus , suspecting his wife ’s
as her sweet bedfellow , creeping on at dawn .
he saw a luckless kinsman fall'n in a bloody lake ;
its shade , and its sunshine , at length
and back withdrawn , the virgin wondering prais'd
that every love of pure kinde
there are thoughts that the mind can not fathom ,
in gorgeous livery,--
few words are mine , for fewest words are meet .
on through a world of turmoil , empty , inane and vast .
his doghter and his sone he nom ,
and the people stared and wondered
las puertas gimieron ,
that ended the confession .
yet , my spirit , back to me ,
and mrs . bays at martha 's vineyard read ,
who doth not love to hear the sabbath bells ?
they 'd best be pricking homeward as quickly as they may ;
through childhood , youth , our solemn steps we bend
the pride of art , the sleeping place of death !
but still a ruby gushes from the vine .
of the sea - like mountain chain ,
and laid him down to die ; but pitying zeus ,
son of lovely thetis , is not fighting , but is nursing his anger
travelled round till our heads travelled just the same way ;
she thus address'd me : " thou true praise of god !
the old order changeth , yielding place to new ,
till on a day with sweet coarse bread
rises the breeze ,
o france , that mockest heaven , adulterous , blind ,
all , slain by ráma ’s arrows , bled .
deep grief the emperor felt when there he saw
he scatters round with hand profuse--
think that a sea had rolled between you twain
as from the " sankhya"--unspiritually--
i am an old , old man , and i have lived
noisy , in scattered waves , crowding and shouting ;
it may smile in his light , but it blooms not again .
let not that day god 's friends and servants scare ;
" yes , write it in the rock , " saint bernard said ,
on a lofty pine tree 's crest .
who live at court , for going once that way ! }
break thou the phrygian robber 's spear in twain ,
the bobolinks are singing !
ye gave it falsehoods for its truth ,
oh , allah be obeyed ,
sae loud , loud laughed he ;
and through the foliage showed his head ,
they rush vpon it by their much dismay ,
your vine half - pruned hangs on the leafy elm ;
for me it was a woeful day .
till she in him should healthier life produce ;
and our rich wisdom that we treasure so
i have drank of a water
then , joyous as for victory won ,
you shall hear how pau - puk - keewis ,
oh for a poet -- for a beacon bright
into the staring street
his daughter , there , the sorrowing chief detains ,
borne by the trumpet 's blast , and scattered through the sky .
that bears them , with the riches of the land ,
nor lose the life of love he came to give ;
why fawn and feign ? what more have i to fear ,
that all the world stands weeping at his tomb .
deep in that shady solitude .
set free , these spread abroad , above ,
well i know you , pau - puk - keewis ! "
trembled so violently , that of that terror
so wise , so simple -- has she never guessed
deep secrets to her rolling light are told ;
that i trace this evil pathway ,
preceding the blest vessel , onward came
so , fixt thro ' joy and pain ,
and sparkles fair godávarí.(692 )
is still our shining shield .
as i was darted from my foes ,
of many a dome and fair - roofed imaret
o , do not steep them in thy tears ,
the feature of an actual harm ! '
but not for panegyric i appear ,
save what the heart unto the soul has spoken ,
and build the haunts of pale disease .
whirl'd round together in one restless wheel .
when my love dropp'd and spak nae mair !
to hunt him yields a manly sport ,
thy lips have set the hail and haste
he wrote , too , in a quiet way ,
the pendent comb and massive drift .
" the voice of god whispers in the heart
object .
to aunt ruth 's queries , " what the truant wrote ? "
into her consistory , and at leisure
thus poorly low !
not unambitious ; in the ruffled shroud ,
however little both are understood
“ alcides was not ) thus his claim oppos'd:--
no whispered converse , not a word
him but awhile to stay ;
sulky as a king .
or hies him to the coral - caves ,
to buy her posies , learns this lore :
i wrought a woman 's eyes of blue ;
above that shrouded tide ?
and read again -- then came the man who knew ,
what wants in blood and spirits , swelled with wind .
' good - bye ! ' the outlaws shouted ,
till sufferings cease and sorrows die .
ceaseless silver murmur of water falling
some other time , "
the jolly old miller , how he will laugh ,
so the women held their heads all in a row , and about all
then laughed out the thunderer elias :
" to nineveh 's imperial turrets haste ;
pitiful trash , that only encumbered the horses and oxen ;
of nails upon himself , for the great rage
rich was the son in brass , and rich in gold ;
his breeches cost him but a crowne ,
who toil , and fight , and sicken beneath the glare
but doubtless as the air , though seldom sunny ,
the parting waves before his coursers fly ;
then the greeks donned their armour : flashed afar
( from the prose of parkman . )
when wintry suns are gleaming bright ,
that having giv'n me appetite to know ,
renounce the body . blood must first be spilt .
" my poor toop - lamb , my son an ' heir ,
and heartless brains sad hearts control--
and growing up to godhead ; which for thee
sweet here to watch the peasant people pray ,
whatever else lacks they must still have their tipple .
this stretched on earth , that propped upon his hand :
seal up your ears , sing some old happy song ,
to mighty brahma , he who made you many as the sands ,
thence we turned our willing car
to bear him safe to lycia 's wide - spread plains :
by moonlit loch or mountain 's brow
the weary always seek for rest .
lxxxv . " if but a respite for the youth be sought ,
who affected society talk ;
and as it has no future , is a hell .
for then i had a score o'kye ,
from belt to belt of crimson seas
more distant , and that prophecy demands
in duel met her on the listed ground ,
we , oh kindly ones , would leave you
the dames who dread the dangers of the seas ,
and turning , to her sister nereids spoke :
that nasty old man of vienna .
with singed top their stately growth though bare
tis so soft and so light ,
what happen'd then , i will now tell unto you ,
a score of lads across the aisle
senegambia .   the fairy tax , tithe , or teind , paid to hell , is
while in her heart she yearn'd incessantly
he spoke , and iris at his word obey’d ;
suddenly , frightened , she awoke , and waking vaguely saw
for many a civic wreath they won ,
while boats o'er the sea are gliding ,
temperaments as the stuff of tragedy , and others as the stuff of
why would you so fain be , dear ,
propriique aenigmata vultus .
while saxony 's as pleased as punch ,
_ the water rush'd out of his een ! _
new springs of life are gushing everywhere
to where his master sank .
to see my hand , that by the same
you 'll see when you get nearer -
you never have to know .
like a shadow of shifting silver it crosses the city ;
nor mild malwah detain ;
a strangeness , which , to us who shine
but , pray , whate'er you may impart , write
would ride through the air
the oaks were there before i came ,
young men we stand ,
and seddul bahr that ever more blood craves .
and never drunk the stuff i earned , nor gambled when i shore --
first saying , " my brothers , may god give you peace ! " we turned
admonente g. wakefield .
he 'll never fly who flies not to - night .
dangled from a slender twig ;
eight o ' my grandsons has fallen ,
while the pilgrim lowly , lowly ,
pity with weeping eye surveys her bowl ,
ontario can not compete
a benediction finishes the romance .
yet some could see him cringe ,
why write i still all one , ever the same ,
to which the fibres of her being
with them rogero goes , in armour cased ,
if i had thought thou couldst have died ,
after the disposicioun
much less than is the hope of every court ,
dark the night -- the rain falls on the ashes ,
and with fair culture to adorn a soil
whate'er thou wilt , nor ought will i refuse . "
the holy spirits of the blest :
you with the terrible warlike mustaches ,
the moon with red distempered fire ,
whose horrid spikes were stained with gore ,
of life from the veiled heavens ; but sleep and death
more colours are struck and the reat in dismay .
fain for the spear - fight .      then fell in the dust
i mean in prayin ' till one busts
would not we shatter it to bitsâand then
as their dwelling - place forever ,
arose the vasty walls and serried towers ,
incondite imps seek grovels cold ,
raise main - sail and jib -- steer forth ,
by the rushing in the spring - time ,
in their woodland haunts elate
go , naughty tray !
and how shall we pass o'er the harbour - bar ?
light after light goes out . one evil star ,
hell 's boatman lists he pass the watery bar .
as worthy of your wonder . "
te , dulcis coniunx , te solo in litore secum ,
of its true pastor . "   whether more he spake ,
a rascal concern’d in the gunpowder plot ,
no creature hym selfe may well assure
that ráma heard , unmoved , from each
thou standest , like imperial charlemagne ,
“ alas , ” king arthur said , “ he hath shown
compared unto the sounding of that lyre
with such a cheer as scorneth folly ,
you come on shipboard with a landsman 's list
no comely mien are his ;
two prayerful eyes of pleading " for one breath--
her evening prayer ; and if by god or you
the long green lances of the corn
the common mother , and to such excess ,
drove it to the magic island ,
o'er the once radiant face of his young wife ?   whence came
on thy head a myrtle spray
a hero 's kindled fire ;
or where the beetle winds
what thou art we know not;--
you , through the mirror of the morning , that one more
las sombras que en silencio descendían
i bless thee , vision as thou art ,
of the father unforgiving :
when , close beside a cutting ,
sing to all men where'er they be
there 's many a sluggard and many a fool
from portals of the past .
among us darkling here the lord of light
and taught me to pronounce their name .
whence , dear ben , i come again :
hide it not , that ye twain having framed death and doom for
they raise the dead , and mount him with a touch .
balow , my boy , weep not for me ,
i think we 're all mad . tell me why we 're here
the little golden dagger at my breast
of any creature reached its primal wave ,
but i could not be ready before ;
" wake from your dreams , o edrehi !
why he was come , and faire him preide
feathers , as it tore them off , { 138 } fell to the ground midway
run nectar .   honey and locusts were the food ,
beats at the heart , and springs in ev'ry vein :
raise goblin cry and hue ,
had come down from the city and had reached the plain , his sons
the winds began to muster , and the sea
in nature 's ruins not one letter lost .
when clover fields smell cool with dew ,
auruncans and rutulians till the ground ;
with broad and burning face .
euryalus ; then helymus is seen ;
for she knifed me one night 'cause i wished she was white ,
interspersed with languor of waxen lilies ,
the lintwhites sing in chorus ;
yet , yet recall the glow
with hands uplifted and imploring eyes ,
to make a man . let fail me every spark
of autumn glimmer ; when are sharply strewn
sith he of rome , and of rome 's empire wide ,
those desolate chambers ; and calm and severe
great purposes with ease , that turns and wields ,
“ and hid beneath the rising bark her face .
my mood was soft;--although i promised naught ,
adown the long , lone aisles ,
with hire which lith in min armes .
and in thy borders take delight ,
all into the deep , deep tartarus ,
remember , and , remember to forget .
the greater their success the worse it proves ,
wondering -- wondering -- but in vain she waited .
' twas told unto the monarch / and with him many a man ,
content at last , for guerdon of their toil ,
narratives is now bringing me among my contemporaries , i begin to
and that of selver ended was ;
a cod she laid below my head ,
to him that wintles in a halter :
that licks his nostrils .   i , lest longer stay
responds the count:--"these arms have nobly struck . "
the aged king , rejoiced to hear
for who that playeth for mony outher gage
but gone unto that school
well worthy of your love was he ,
an ' never give a bloke a stray dog 's chance ,
from the idæan summit soar'd at once
so were it with me if forgetting could be will'd .
he neely fell into the creek through looking round and round .
of dream over the glade of sleep
the hearth is nearly hot .
the dim uncertain chaos of desire
and through the gateways of a raggèd wound
who hates originality ,
burst from his heart , and torrents from his eyes :
hung from his neck a shield , was of girunde ,
her trustful tale . she answered not ;
there yet perhaps may dawn an age ,
she took a napkin lang and white ,
cast the viceroy and his council , to perspire
and setting this unrighteous madman on to do further mischief . i
and waxes strong ; and when the summer goes ,
ere yet the ashes have grown cold !
with light foot on life 's threshold set,--
the roar of that red sea uncontrolled ,
( till they find some properer peers for him ) ,
you remember , the deep mist,--
an ' it 's best as you shall say ! _
let me be elder , if his soldiers are .
al only into goddes cure ;
what was i , or my generation ,
whitening for half a league , and thin themselves ,
to that new world of light and bliss , among
but ah ! what slender chain of love is this
where love is throned .
and sprang impatient at the word ;
we leave behind the shortening day .
new friends will clasp your hand , dear , new faces on
o then this pleasant earth
she show'd me a cherry as red as blood ,
and work for william 's child , until he grows
the hall was dressed with holly green ;
upon death 's purple altar now
as the coffin - cold wraps round
could hold ye fast from me:--
“ already captive deem'd . though fierce our foe ,
my heart with my hands , lift to god in the heavens ,
kindness soothes the bitter anguish ,
for well i know my speech must one offend ,
his master , and his answer made .
for beggers and bawdes therin haue all theyr game
which with temptation i could trust ,
high and low , wise and simple , all busily hoard up the
can we so far
which _ johnny _ with _ sir jeff'ry _ shar'd .
o !   nothing earthly save the ray
mirt . and that his birth should be more singular ,
this plain truth -- mankind are blest in
and fair sets he ;
in . ay , blessed be this day . where is thy fire ?
calling him in his will , and thus holding him up to posterity , as
scorpion and asp , and amphisbaena dire ,
if the old shall kiss young , and the young shall kiss old .
wind of the fragrant south ,
swift are our flashing feet ,
over the caliban sea ,
the hugeness of an overburthened wain :
_ four - stress trochaic . _
the shadow of his sister , as the beam
the twelve miss pelicoes
_ and pleased the childe appeared nor ere the boy reviled _ . }
wretch of a tramp : it will be worse for you if he should turn
" then to the well - trod stage anon ,
and of those demons that are found
chorus : then come , & c.
" the banners of hell 's monarch do come forth
hissed among the withered oak - leaves ,
and in wo endyth , great mysery and payne
and when i pat the dear old whelp , it ...
in prose i bend my humble verse ) doth call
to aid in any way his master 's cause ,
and with the arcadian spears my prowess tried ,
much for her : he had given a hundred - head of cattle down , and had
some one , all their labor balking ,
a reptile , so severe on rhyme .
the help of heaven we count the act of men :
shall destroy thy wicked tribe - folk .
till he followed where never was track ,
bursts forth , enceladus , ' tis said , doth lie ,
he knew not what the radiance meant ,
craving new fields and some unheard - of shore ,
but in known images of life , i guess
" two boys have been good to - day ? "
punished by the gods and left him to his plight !
is the river world indebted
witching them with words divine--
many a day they marched in the sun till their silver armour was
and singing still dost soar , and soaring ever singest .
swung round to take the cruiser 's fire
with all his four feet covers and bestrides ,
close - grained hoofs spreading faintly from coronet to base .
the lord of lowing herds ; but not before
i 'll pluck the mallows and make soup .
and show us what his will required .
we knew right well
a monarchy o'erthrown , here seem to me
when she will not let him know
without her soul to thine , the page is dull
within the city , and the solitude ,
fellow to the nights and days ;
trot seven more of black ,
this clan damns each giant soldan first .
that our chief magistrate would not regard with eyes of
one hears the towering creature rend the seas ,
it sprang without sowing , it grew without heeding ,
and center there , are better than gold .
nec procumbere humi prostratum et pandere palmas
he clasps his heels ; belts to his side his sword ,
gave him the omen of propitious sound .
of the world - father ,
welmore than thei don of thonder .
and you with a new language meet :
gin ' ye part wi ' me , laddie .
a man 's choice , yes -- but a cabin - passenger's--
destroyer of thy foes ! they sink anew
for poor cordelia patiently
now be thy further will declared . ”
the morning would be just the same ,
but dews were wet on the grass - grown mound
are circumfused there .
to save them from false sextus
most excellently ravelled .
my image , not imparted to the brute ;
" though on his cheek youth 's blossoms scarce appear ,
this sum of things is seen to be compact )
gabriel , to thee thy cours by lot hath giv'n
do á sus galanos colores ,
y no hay playa
and the nightingale replies ;
childish prattle that must make
" o son of priam ! let thy faithful ear
and made a gallant crest .
( _ abbaabba _ ) ; the sestet on either two or three , the most common
" me like'um tooth same gold , " he said .
such love as only could belong
with winged speed the circuit of the ground .
but cruel sure was their design ,
that sweetly ye might span .
my theme , and therefore if with greater art
to stall the grey - rat , and the carrion - worm
--all who sir _ jeffery _ knew could tell
" he wings his passage thro ' the yielding air ? "
the hour will come ( which let not me
you and i plucking rushes
but a child caressing ,
to bear a little way ? "
and things of earth , the hunted and outcast ,
but i 'd take it kindly if you 'd send the pieces
my heinsius from leyden !
" thou art our king , o death ! to thee we groan . "
an ewe and ram of most superior breed .
ere it can float to the carved angels there ,
and a boar , the mate of swine , and depart for home , and
such risk as thou must meet and dare ,
to dronacharjya , who declined
and , therefore , bards of old ,
those citizens who founded her again
would that my hand might gather here
an ' ev'n devotion !
let the brawling slave deride--
whom god makes lonely ,
if monarch or chief art thou ;
of future kings ; one only son he had ,
the sunbeams filtered through
which ( now that the eating 's o'er ) comes cheap .
the _ kitchen - maid _ sat still and cried ,       }
her dower , the adopted clusters , to adorn
then high , then lowe againe , yn sweetly iarrs
he done e't more dan erry three men .
blow .
him , filled it with verse .   but there was not room in his
than to ride , without blood , to the north brazos side ,
the fervour , which it kindles ; and that too
of ruined roses , wrists and feet
even that of a woman .
and made his taxed up subjects pay ;
both lances , made of willow thin and dry ,
i know no life divided , 190 .
_ zerah . _ o silence !
thus the young khan , with houris in his sight ,
the storm of missiles fiercely cast
brought on a ling'ring illness .
but crown her royal head .
havserat insolitos promissae uirginis ignis
that day -- it was the last of many days ,
as placid in its purity .
braced to the bayonet ,
abstain'd .   and lo !   toward us in a bark
pen that rained it on the page .   here is a letter ,
resembling each other so
and here the lilies , by whose odour known
ye draw my soul unto your blue
met in a close embrace .
so he won credit ; eager to deny
' why hast thou forgot thy mother ,
from imposition of strict laws , to free
for girlhood too will have its doubts and fears ,
and violets and yellow star - flowers teem ,
then first the coursing birds , smitten at heart ,
then father bear growled ,
next those who in pelasgian argos dwelt ,
quick while i melt ; make reconcilement sure
into a bower for some fair goddess made .
healed the tribes of kalevala ,
" years passed on , and then i saw them first :
like hoar - frost when the sun is high . ”
who , if they durst , would all thy secret sins expose ;
from the ground so dearly bought ,
" anne ! " her mother frowned angrily .
i saw my love 's eyes , and they were brimmed with love .
in whose advance i secretly could joy .
beaver sat upon the mountain ,
no dower ; myself will such a dower bestow
" well thrown , bautista -- that 's another soul ;
that was the court attendance / there in the burgundian land .
soldiery pouring on esperanza :
sail , swallows , sail this emerald sea
why are you silent , heroes ? why
soldier to lead , or sage to teach ,
" oh , yes , it is , lady harden . it 's because i am young , and big ,
believ'd in him , who had the means to help ,
ill suits this garb the shoulders of a king . "
peace nestles close to her mournful mother ,
the brave , sweet words that cheer the way
that thou should'st all my secrets learn , which once
o happiness!--and am i then so blest ?
maud muller worked at making hay ,
syne , a ' is weel , though my banes lie here for iver ,
all were gone , or broken - winged or devoured by life --
fail from earth 's air , and i not know ?
" let wreaths of triumph now my temples twine , "
be name cleped licuchis ;
i , that can do naught else but weep ,
but harald was hot of hand and heart
-- and this -- all this -- because i was a man !
champions chosen ,
the major loves a long day 's outing ,
and ofte swich as men beginne
else shall the huns imagine / that i all friendless am .
uncommon in songs . ]
hide , hide your golden light !
however some persons might scoff it ,
ding dong
and swore by armes , and by blood , and bones ,
dead like a dog in a drunken brawl ,
are self - contained , compact , harmonized ,
of two things -- how ( the question rather odd is )
and swords gold - hilted--
then in this magic circle raise the dead;--
to hand me such a bunch when i was true !
how wouldst thou value if thou hadst not wept ?
whereon so fixedly i held my ken ,
the plains and river - windings far and wide ,
once i wore poppies , red upon my brow ,
yet masons will be masons still ,
bound with faint haze , a frail transparency ,
far , far at sea ,
in pleasure wrapt , the parents stand ,
one careless look on me she flung ,
that was subtle with craft :
thy span beyond their treason 's chastisement . "
i 'd give -- what 's on my cheek ? not tears !
the swineherd 's song .
a barefit maid i chanc'd to meet ;
when comes your moment of decay . _
france go about this business calm and stern ,
his helping hand , his brother to sustain .
for no man wyll i spare ,
than to the smitten : in conclusion , they
who probed the death of elenor murray goes
my prowess i will prove ,
till your longing grew and stirred .
ayer viento süave
an ' twere but of the goose and golden eggs . '
for once , on a december night
with comfort on the twilight way he went ,
then thou must pack to rome , where thou mightst lie
there 's nothing very beautiful and nothing very gay
my thoughts are green with spring time , among the meadow rue
why thy visage so dejected ?
as the deck - hands make fast the steamboat the plank is thrown for
oh ! were it given to yield this transient breath ,
eh gai ! c'est la devise
the sky was their goal where the star - flags are furled ,
homeward bound .
abide wolde upon the lond ,
but soon scattered wide
śárdúlí , śvetá fair to see ,
on the shining wall a vast
whose touch each warrior must unseat parforce ;
but i'se repeat each poor man 's pray'r ,
which , i suppose , to be necessary for its further
there 's poor old fred in the gazette ;
and gather for my head fresh meed of fame ,
as she is famed to do , deceiving elf .
whence rang or flashed no hint of lurking peril .
so perfectly sweet as you !
oracles of great zeus approve , myself i will slay him and
and when i renounce anger , greed is with me still ;
¿ serán fuertes , serán bravos hoy ?
hornie 's turnin chapman -- he'll buy a ' the pack .
the fisherman in his boat , far out beyond the headland ,
trim and burning , to and fro ,
how to use the lips in blowing ,
still hopes your sun - set , while he views your noon ,
shall fall beneath my fury dead ,
from flowers too little to reveal
through heaven , the very spheres ,
and blown in twenty dollars by nine o'clock a.m. ?
and happy faces ,
flows pyriphlegethon , and cocytus , a branch of the water of
but they kep ' up a - comin ' in spite o ' my talk ,
goodness gracious , patience me !
soft rebukes , in blessings ended ,
blush pink , textured like ripe fruit .
some have wings and swift are gone;--
in the sun 's sight , clothed with the light of the sun ;
shall wander , and without the world 's decree ,
to bring their noble prince safe back from war ;
when things meet most opposite ;
behold an infinite of floating worlds
that , overcome by fright ,
he works and much endures .
and loath this drosse of sinfull worlds desire .
with a sweet emotion ;
peace to the world from ports without a gun !
just look at me ! would you believe
he was in de topmost story -- ach , mein gott ! i luf him well !
my world will light its hundred different lamps with thy flame
bright be their path .
where has the swift foot gone ?
and flout the pole that , east , he lord confessed !
misfortune sha ' na steer thee ;
and in sad cypres let me be laid ;
" when her blood fell on the planet ,
and thus the pride which was hot ,
this gave me that precarious gait
whose action is no stronger than a flower ?
canto xxiv . sixth ledge : the gluttonous.--forese
surely you 've heard about tailor nils , who flaunts him so gay .
the mountain , which ascending shriveth all .
his banner over me is love .
spouse of penniless ibycus ,
wash your face ,
who bade him loose his boat , and fix his oar ,
when she smites thee with her staff
lived there , and played the craftsman well ;
the tassels are their waving flags ;
and so the song breaks off ; and i 'm alone .
but , how to break these bars !
seaward to rest .
they vow'd to ask the gods .
and hostages doe offer for ray truth ,
even this your dream , that by much tribulation
¿ vuela el alma al cielo ?
them _ sound - mind _ jurymen ?
recluses of the college close ,
i do intrude i greatly fear .
thus venulus concluded his report .
then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by ,
command supreme . in dio 's hopeless day
write , " this is the baby 's stocking
toward that goodly presence : th ' other seiz'd her ,
descending the broad hall - stair ,
that , as thou see'st , he yet deserts me not .
" we live on hills , to ev'ry toil we 're tri'd ,
mason of his walls of clay ,
steeps toby 's brand , and marks poor cudjoe 's breast.[a ]
hoosie , _ small house _ , ie _ being the termination of diminutives _ .
only _ keep still _ , so i can hear myself
and heather , where his footsteps pass ,
and do his thinkin ' first , you know ,
or " the dreary tundras of remote siberia , "
has the spinning wheel 's soft whirring
who is serene ?   not he who flees his kind ,
cyllenian otus , friend of phyleus ' son ,
no voice of woman or of child
his lifted shield that rose and strove
to a pond of quiet water ,
the azure height and trod the stars among ?
and , gathered all above ,
o kind messenian maidens , o my friends ,
who goes in fearless
of light and shade 's inconstant race ;
fling wide the gates of war .
stayed at home , he gave it to his faithful squire ereuthalion ,
yet folded in each other 's arms they lie ,
alas ! no medicine can heal the smart
and mine is left to me -
and stouter hearts that through the brine
come sing , come sing , of the great sea - king
but purpler pomp ! but , see ! regenerate
with pallid lips and curdled blood ,
do'ant be stunt : taäke time : i knaws what maäkes tha sa mad .
free as the sunshine and the chainless wind ;
jam cedant , veteris cedant miracula saxi ,
for his own share , the lady of the herd . "
and bastioned wall be not less hard to win ,
long as he breathed the vital air ,
of him that set is up - on coveityse ;
for sky and river in one colour blend ,
job 's self had job known him .   the more you 'd have thought
encamped in strength a thousand miles away ?
" mr . sparrow - piper tup , we intend on you to sup ! "
whativer task you tackle , lads ,
hili ho ! boys , hili ho !
smoke driving down , men 's shouts and children 's squeals ,
i know him , february 's thrush ,
the invincible , and , after these , the fourth ,
gone blankets and the cloak i used to wear ;
on which their neighbours lay such stress ,
and round the linden sounded wide .
you flagg'd walks of the cities ! you strong curbs at the edges !
a mighty wind arose and blew ,
thou was rogero , as i know it now ,
the sire anchises scanned , with fond delight ,
often like two children maying ,
how throb'd his sickening frame with fierce alarms !
was always turning different ways ;
the water lily , white as winter 's flake ,
closes with night 's accomplished certainty ,
and you shall see how the devil spends
" and may i believe it , " cried emma , " that jem ,
completely i know each day brings me nearer
if death should come to me to - night , and say :
him of his errand to the master .
" was rich where i was poor ,
so frolic , stout and self - possest ?
and when the clock strikes , be on hand !
principal poems issued by mr . arthur christopher benson
by mary bright no mortal wight
who goeth a warfare , or hunting , alone ?
--one _ elder lady _ rubb'd her eyes ,
and soon the lines grew smooth and round
ben evere redi forto lie ;
at once the stick he broke .
her dwarfed and twisted with her secret charm ;
" a most beautiful song that , and sung with much feeling ;
and on the fourth dawn from a wave at last
with wreaths of flowers they fanned his face ,
the upper boughs and shake from each
if he prove unruly , lay the blame on me .
the thames creeps on in sluggish leadenness ,
i saw thee stoop to pluck from off the lawn
that ye two in the old days      often exchanged
up above the world so high ,
the other form of fraud makes nullity
they mingle not with their laughing comrades again ;
weeping upon the trojans . moreover let the heralds tell it about
fluttered in its chambers . for lo , when i behold thee
the spacious hall his father placed , to whom
hail to thee , wainola 's hamlet ,
the waste of waters for the wearied oar !
through all the flowers for their honey store
and cry as when bathed in a pool--
they to the pasture , from the cattle - yard ,
and the hum of the bees ev'rywhare !
no spiritual control myself will bear ,
and the ghosts
to him no high , no low , no great , no small ;
the pibroch sounds , the bands advance ,
by the lit place ,
i heard my true - love sing , and she taught me many a strain ,
half wondering why , when spring 's fresh breezes came ,
i hear the children 's laughter as they roam ,
they sound the insulting clarion shrill and loud ,
between the scepticism of the ancients and the moderns the great
and when he sang the latter end of such
he turn'd his head , he saw a sight ...
on yonder lofty mountain
" my lord has spoken justly of his lady ; why not i of my mother ?
by wallace ' side ,
and hides her cheek beneath the flowers of may .
their fall in thunder echoes round the walls .
that harbinger of fate and gloom ,
bears us away the virtue of that cord
the vale with many a proud pavilion gay ,
to look as solemn as phunny - kind .
per gentis italas hominum quae clara clueret :
over the west has gone .
franks them to god and to his angels vow .
he hoped , of course ,
wallete in wogen ; in des wassers gebiet
an answer to the rebus , by the author of these poems .
in the waves she left the spittle ,
than we was !   so we growed up side by side fer thirteen year ' ,
devolved to others , whom he might have entertained with equal
he can not take from us , though oft he has tried ,
then lamoracke , with hardier cheer ,
thou holy man , at whitby 's shrine
breaks into sparkling rings the faintly heaving tides .
had ended now thir orisons , and found ,
bonnie , blooming jessie .
lawless cyclopes , a pastoral people of giants . later greece
the sunset through that oriel ?
the coach is at the door at last ;
the lord is mine , his will my choice ;
the gentle dove may , when these turmoils cease ,
of myself and some others who sing it " with fire , "
in each melodious breath;--
is none more active , or more light of foot ;
and shrill their merry laughter rang .
beneath a pine the monarch has repaired ;
riding there in his sorry trim ,
can the caged bird , escaped from bondage , share
and , trolling lustily and long ,
france blew to deafness :   for a space she mused ;
and crying with a mighty voice , woe , woe ,
and fighting them , she thus made good amends
fruitful as vice the dread correctors stand ,
( oh , the hill is fair and green ! )
" o skies be calm !   o winds blow free -
" thy gloom , that eblis ' self might dread ,
attempting bold the ranks , and where he points
on the kind breast of earth , the quiet mother !
post modium quatiens virgo fugat orta uaporem :
and reckless buoyancy of temper flashed
the hunters eyed it and were grim .
" baby , jelly , tiny -- tiny , where 's bunch ? "
but then , alas , the trouble is , i do n't know what they are .
hate and disdain showed her by so many , especially by the earl 's
down thy tide , susquehanna , the murmur has gone !
my soule [ 's ] so full of harmonie ,
the self - complacent actor , when he views
what ? wearied out with half a life ?
christ the crucified will heal the breaking heart .
and still the sweet half - solemn look
" zelica , zelica ! " the youth exclaimed .
when he dares hope a colonel 's command ,
i lie , god - forsaken ,
there is a power whose care
hey for the mill and the kill ,
i welcomed any moderate disaster
recognised under the foreign forms and metres in which these
and the other , to righteousness true ,
so ' ere 's to you , fuzzy - wuzzy , at your ' ome in the soudan ;
them , seated at the festive board , molest ;
those animals , that hate the cultur'd fields ,
for her fair body pillowed soft the ground ,
no more the mocking white shall rest
your noble resistance we can not forget ,
will the day 's journey take the whole long day ?
the land where all good wives do bake
yet whiles his swalla 's wide eneuch ,
_ neptune disclos'd new isles which he did play
take thou the carlin 's carcase aff ,
keeps the bee his festival ;
ah , happy land untouched of blight ,
to manhood , with children of his own , would laugh at the yellowed
if colin 's weel , and weel content ,
blue , clear , and deep as is virginity .
+ wytte.+ hew lookest thou one him halfe a scorne
blessings that from sorrows save ,
her silent husband and her wailing babe ,
each flake a wonder rare .
nev ' min ' if yō ' mammy say :
with flames so numberless throughout its space
to what high fane?--ah ! see her hovering feet ,
clamorous contradiction is precisely what the aggregate of poets '
" heav'n , and all nature , hangs upon that point .
lyth and lystyn , gentilmen ,
for dear cousin jane , and despatched it by post ,
" whose darkness severs me as wide from thee
mr . beard 's attention to the affairs of the theatre having
allow copies to be made , so as to obtain a return of a portion of
who in their country 's cause against the foe
" rua , be silent , spare me .   taheia closes her ears .
seventy years ago .
he was a queen 's son .
with his driv'n chariot he divides the crowd ,
a pot of beans suspended by a wire
ces vieillards ont toujours fait tresse avec leurs sièges .
whose angels , stooping from the heights of heaven ,
i am threescore and ten ,
pleasingly the wrong'd are righted .
the bold tide , the gold tide , the flood o ' the sunlit sea,--
of ionia , famed for a temple and oracle of apollo , and near which
sacred to proserpine ; and shew'd a bough
as he wel couthe in his manere ,
crack , tale ; a chat ; talk .
and before his father on the throne ,
on ordinary feet .
what do i care for the lever of friction ,
what would i do ? why , socialize the world ,
with desperate charcoal round his darkened walls ?
went through the gardens with one dame alone
see us go !
the universal sabbath , does not join
off whom life leans for guidance in our fight ,
let those who pant for glory 's charms ,
a guard lay prostrate on the sand ,
o fate , what evil wind you blow .
to fill up your coffers with gold ;
now hold thy hand,--for i can see
their virtue , spite of me and you .
but him , preventing , peleus ' godlike son
sequence of his various works . in the year 1386 , being called as
will spare to spoil or mend her .
" see that big man that all in brown is bound ,
' tis time to give my just disdain a vent ,
she fell down like one slain :
and o'er the bed she brocht her ;
and morning in her eyes .
it fell down to the ground .
makes bad result . and if the world down there would fix attention
her locks to comb , thus galatea fair ,
hope nothing , if i thus may speak
does the church stand i raised
where the ground is bad for walking ,
( whose guilt is past all pardon )
that noman were nyh the stede ,
we 've got some splendid bags .
spilling its star - dust back to dust again .
a spark of sunset burns ,
rather ' twas humbleness in being pursued ,
of oeneus all , nor oeneus self survived ;
as ocean , when the high winds have upheaved
then jars of honey , and of fragrant oil ,
and having human feelings , does not blush
stone walls do not a prison make ,
" car mes reves sont las comme de blancs oiseaux
but they shouted “ stop there , you liberal thief ! ”
to wear it with a dauntless heart ,
to catch at and let go .
share the life that is eternal ,
to the love we felt in ages past .
with his whistlings rude ;
step lofty ; for this name is told
burn and glitter , so white and quick ,
and memory in his breast awoke ,
could match the smile of jean .
car , flag , and pole and yoke and wheel .
girt with a crimson robe of brightest dye ,
ἰσχυρός . ]
a gay cavalcade some few feet in advance .
by a great angel standing in the sun ,
that holds their blossoms and their leaves in cure
the chancellor , knocked at tycho 's eastern gate .
with ready bow the champion stood
sang she through a dream - night 's day ;
his love was only for a day :
as by a table i sat me down .
and giv'n him strength and suppleness of limb ?
horns , drums , and shrilling clarions filled the skies ;
their lives to save . but the soul of one
there you paused ; you left me empty - handed in the dust to create
and more profound , journeying to higher realms ,
and blue at the mizzen was hoisted instead
" if naught but a peerage can gladden thy life ,
crookneck squash seeds , quebec , 87 .
and as our lady on her glorious stool ,
let but the plot be spun off fast and thickly ,
the hammer down heave ,
fronting the fight in the eye of the brave .
sad - faced , and sorrowful . her mouth
who require , i own it , more links to my chain .
spirit , that swell'd so proudly ' gainst his god ,
love told his dream of yesternight ,
for lovers have the clearest eyes .
breathing of dew - sprinkled lilies
inform us , by letter , what people are there .
ambitions make the world unkind .
on golden sands
and though i would have hushed the crowd
with organ mingle , and , now high and clear
that hung upon the challenge of their fate .
when i was young and frivolous and never
regardless of his low estate ,
behind a frowning providence
lean hunger grins and stares between
and very weak and faint ; heal and amend me .
for she her will , alack ! had done .
" for i make honour wi ' muckle mouth ,
that my time has come this morning ,
more welcome for that brief delay :
and the link ' tween moon and water ;
his greedy flames , and kindled life - devouring fire . "
straightway speeds the fiery charger ,
and the musely swelling breast
of nights extended shade ; from eastern point
_ maist _ , most , almost .
to pieces helm and solid corslet goes ,
for what the dear old butler thought !
but times were hard .   he went to a pan
i galloped , dirck galloped , we galloped all three ;
and part on the magistral table lights ,
freely voutsaft ; once more i will renew
_ but one and all if they would dusk the day _ .
but all shall fly with many a tear
reflected woe , and o'er unruffled tides
for its freedom
abates in him the keenness of desire ,
and queer each o'erfraught chaise 's load ,
and set his foot upon the neck of that scarce - breathing man ,
and i perceived that hideously ' twas fraught
i hope you 'll send them back ;
restless , helpless , hopeless ,
even love goes past .
dear to me the woods i know ,
with joyful fierceness and undying zest .
awakening bud an ' blossom
watcheth for the coming only
unpleasing to a married ear !
lord , for the erring thought , 140 .
and price of labor is so cheap
but yet this gift thou wilt commend
music arose with its voluptuous swell ,
the pretty ladies'-maids were pinning of cockades ,
these self - reveal'd and self - revealing ,
must fetters which his slaves have worn
inviolable utterly , and dead
( notice i call on god ! ) we 'd plumb this riddle
say , shall i to yon flemish church ,
" moly " ( mo'ly ) , by edith m. thomas ( 1850- ) , in the best possible
and for whose nakedness the air
vas made , ash i hafe heard ,
she wore no funeral - weeds for thee ,
thee , of thyself so apt , in regal arts ,
and the note ! ' tis the wail of the weariest wave
o , i knew not ; and , lo , this is love 's wine ,
the outward husk , and reach to him
be half so fair as she !
whereby from death to life he had been brought ;
tenting on the old camp ground .
our hearts ran o'er like a gushing well ,
when bats begin to fly ,
his manner how _ distingue _ and discreet ,
" just the same in bright weathers or bleak ; " )
bottles cracked in taverns -- have much the sweeter kernels ,
the evening comes , the fields are still .
all clear--
strange alteration in me , to degree
and is there ought great cato can not do ?
thither , by chance conducted to this bay ,
und zu wachsen .
can bigot frown or tyrant fetter quell
and still we lost again .
to keep thee shining brightly round each hearth ,
made all our slumbers soft and light .
life , marcellina , leaving thy fair frame ,
and drizling drops , that often doe redound * ,
funeral of patroclus -- for you shall see him no more among the
the sacred recess
i cried :   i was so small .
on youth 's rash bosom , dangerously inclin'd
he passes , pauses , then comes slowly back
through the pleasant days of summer ,
my heart beat fast .
that tongue nor pen may follow it .   tow'rds spain
and now when night made dark the pole ,
but the silent spirit hushed him , lulled him as he cried anew ,
' my wish be wi ' sweet willie !
he was a braw gallant ,
on mountain top or furrow'd ground .
of aster and golden - rod ,
and his twin brother nakula : whereat
_ the trail they blazed was gory ;
they were fresh as the twitter of birds -- my pet ,
t.p . 's weekly
and swelled their canvas full
from this , the meanest garret in the world ,
or ere it dart unto its aim : but shine
and time itself seemed slow ,
but a celestial call to - day
but , swoln with wind and the rank mist they draw ,
" heave , " and i saw a back , then two .   " port fore . "
wax - red hangs the cup
for sad and painful is the fate
in mumbling of the game they dare not bite :
_ ashley _ : " not the least in the world . "
moved him to death the felon to pursue ;
and sicilies are in them , rows
the heroes of old ,
have their arguments , which i have read a hundred times ; but that
" let me taste your ware . "
full knee - deep lies the winter snow ,
that ye it wolden telle i preie .
shut thy wicked teeth in darkness ,
but still your smile shines down familiar ways ,
and , now , with added gratitude ,
though each apart were never so weak ,
steady and long he struggles ,
in the langobardian cycle also is the tale of " rother , " supposed
" reft from me in albracca , by a thief ,
joanna , looking in my eyes , beheld
to sea and to sky and to shore i gaze ,
and can not again be fired
there 's a ghostly music haunting
like cain , i drive you to the land of nod .
the noblest gain from virtue springs ,
as he banned or he blest , just whatever seemed best
i sometimes walk and watch it there
the mother with her offspring goes
the joglars supple and the troubadours .
inspicat calamos contracta fronte malignos ,
what , par dieux ! i am nought religious !
like one who rises having dived to free
and colder still , let hearts grow old .
the world , which thanne in senne stod ,
as you blow through apple blossoms ....
we clear might read the art and wisdom rare :
to every christian eye :
you see , merry phillis , that dear little maid ,
before st . mark still glow his steeds of brass ,
and juno 's bird no more display
ter some one who had gone back home too soon
she will recall . if so for love she yearn ,
ye came to fight ; a valiant foe to chase ,
burn turn'd and cried , with scornful eye ,
and swear for her to live -- with her to die !
in sad flights of song , and singing
unto the thought of him , whose palm
and the answer he makes is : " lackaday !
hickity o , pickity o , pompolorum jig !
a maid , and beautiful , and just eighteen .
and to her maker 's praise confined the sound .
they thought , those that , unarm'd , expos'd frail life ,
predigend reisenden ,
here may my life expatiate gloriously--
each had a lock of yellow hair
" stay where you are until our backs are turned ! "
full in the mouth is stopp’d the rushing tide ,
i call'd all capit'lists sharks ;
my shroud of white , stuck all with yew ,
and with the spur admonished brigliador .
when all the sky was pale .
envy so parch'd my blood , that had i seen
stand , like a ghost , between revenge and doom ! '
the hour was late ; the fire burned low ,
that other , stands to watch the ebbing sand ;
the shepherd 's pipe come clear from aery steep ,
and while the clouds besiege the vales below ,
whose faint , elusive charm , and gentle airs ,
while silken curtains hang about their bed !
no tears are needed -- fill out the wine ,
weep thou not yet : behooves thee feel the edge
had passed since then . and on this day poor wenner
hîc velut nidum positurus hæsit ,
" to far distant times shalt thou , an outcast , crawl
the poison'd tooth to fasten .
of our cold - hearted brother , with tyrannous hand ,
bribe , murder , marry , but steer clear of ink
again upon the altar - flame he cast
for the olive , the vine and the wheat ,
or ever death his fated term prescribe ;
till every pulse beat true to airs divine ,
frequently in _ their _ mouths as in _ yours _ .
unfolded by her mother . / upon her nearest kin ,
while on his lips the half - formed accents died .
_ hans lorbass _ . a respite until day - break , in which time to yield
had somnus dried the balmy dews away .
and all along a dismal rack of clouds ,
he confess'd ' twas his foible to value old blood ,
the coldness of the dew -- and all a gleam
son long col frele et vacillant .
of paint and powder , and she knew me ;
of intervening darkness has thine eye
as , by thy son , thou didst :
cold from its source the stream meanders
poor vivien had not done to win his trust
bear fleeting memories , that come and go ;
there 's the regent , there 's louis -- and boney tried too ,
and even a little
or soon thereafter loved me , as i know ,
the right part of our members is observed
yet , for awhile , ' gainst passion 's threatful blast
encircled round ; on this he leant , and said ,
were rock and air and water mine ,
you say , i love you .
i give you daily my whole heart ,
so best confirm their prowess and their pride ,
" --never!"--said ganelon , " while lives rollánd :
_ faust _ . i 'm near her , and , though far away , my word ,
canto xli . the army of the south .
and ay she sang so merrilie :
the bodies of cromwell , ireton , and bradshaw
e'en now my bands of heavenly maids have spied
crost and came near , lifted adoring eyes ,
through the struggles of years , and are victors at last ;
and aimed at thought , a butt it may not miss :
and all those tender names in one , thy love !
unknown to thousands husbanded and wived :
cross so vilely in eternal exile . thereafter he addressed this
smitten by years - long wryness born of misprision ,
she weareth yet no crown ,
the tartar 's faulchion was the first to bite ,
the tumult ceas'd , the colt submitted ,
all this , and cast a wide and tender light ,
dedi sopore placans artus languidos :
humanity lies gasping and becalmed
whenever the moon and stars are set ,
and bleating sheep and lowing kine
and saith ` ah ! ' tis my sweetest no - brains :   mine ! '
that one short hour was told .
to the dwelling of ruotus .
the bad were like a demon , a vast shape
laurel ! veil your deathless tree , --
of numerous shielded warriors brave of troy ,
" what care i for curse of talmud ?
but he might sell , and forty pounds would buy .
more animae ; domus interea secura patellas
and know , at last , i may not enter more .
i promise thee , achilles , to the greeks
hath yet my knee ,
with the cold words she said .
by rays which sleep there lovingly : the rocks,[kl ]
or through the market , on the well - worn stones
as fast we flit along the beach,--
and how from eve to morn in space so brief
in aught that any man could do or say :
until her best petticoat 's
our companion 's dying sign ,
hate me an hour , and then turn round
the things that are above ;
' in kingdom of navarre i first saw light .
how the woodchuck digs his hole ,
ha sabido unir ,
as waiting for some face denied .
see , near us on the ground are left
as thou hast ever spoken ,
insurrection as often as they please . it is good for trade and
thei kessen ferst , and overmore
since the viands were outset here
pressed through the crowd , he cries above the rest
  biographical supplement to _ biographia literaria _ , chap .
high up above rue castiglione ;
and whatever of life hath ebbed away
some sin away at sacrifice .
and knockt whole scores of watchmen down .
so wit is by politeness sharpest set ;
in an unhappy home .
he said , " my friends have wended forth
atque novam vitam te novus orbis habet .
ah , the theme -- the sad , grey theme !
children , too , that none can number ;
whilst they did sleep in love 's elysium .
life to her was a perfect flower ,
with a pricking of yellow stars .
the godlike follower of aeacides :
to pour forth their tune - footed throngs ;
following were left , nor any of the men of aegisthus , but
“ and twenty ride of them before
thereupon the ruddy rascal ,
and the multitude suddenly turned and flew .
cometh at dawn , scattered by the wind .   it was the god of glory
and pain has a work to do .
i hated the rocks and the dust ;
with your ears and tail so waggy,--
then to the trojans hector call'd aloud :
thane schalle erthe of erthe hafe full harde partynge .
to live with thee and be thy love .
no ; be it mine to fan the regent 's hate ;
love wove sweet links and sympathies divine ;
vor we do hear the blackbird zing
i envy not myself the precious boon .
and then i heard thy voice upon the lea .
the noble norns , within the portal stand,--
at least for luncheon they may pass ,
ha'e writ my virtues in a sang ;
read him in french , it might be possible at least to convey
for alacke i can neither write , ne reade .
der ganze garten frägt nach ihr , nach ihr .
while unsheathed sabres flash and cannons roar ,
their glory , that eternal fame inherit :
few , few shall part , where many meet !
nigh opening :   till in the braid
to follow , earlier yet , the feet
or how could thy notes flow in such a crystal stream ?
once more i warn thee , rákshas king ,
and ideas derived from a greek education . the age in which satire
such as may teach , ’ twas still thy brave delight
of such good vassals carle will see the loss . "
their sage experience to the favourite child .
in the after part of the day
the parrots reëchoed the call :
help , and he especially upbraided brave melanippus son of
that have laid them down to rest here;--
and the returning line
for charlotte understood her trade :
a dazzling insect worries the heart of a rose ,
now we are sullen in this sable mire . '
wish'd he were certain , or the cause were just :
if accusation only can draw blood , i. 244 .
and adds the herdsman 's to the shepherd 's care ,
the hamlets bare
that so a little calm i yet may win
but with my body my poor soul 's pollution ?
the bolted cell , the galley 's chains ,
corpus licet fatiscens
" i have a son in france , myself , " he said . " his name is mccrae . "
haith , lad , ye little ken about it !
hasten to pan 's festival ;
the besoms ply it in , man ;
as newly they had caught
but saw , as on their way they sped ,
for following beyond measure appetite
outside the sparkling drift became ,
my deeps here , willow - shaded ;
when reckoned by the things that count the most,--
they 'll weep for the maiden who sleeps in this wave .
declares its own vast mystery ,
and presence by his working prove,--
ah , that no wing can lift me from the soil ,
but now no more the ghost of scandal stalk'd about ;
an ' dour wi ' chuckies ,
fear of death .
my poverty encreasing with my age ;
  89 . = cham.= the great cham , or khan , was the ruler of tartary .
llawer llef druan fal ban fu’r gamlan .
to fish , and then home send 'em . to fly -- to whip--
the sky is like a blue jellyfish .
the course she had adopted was the best ;
my soul , prophetic , counsels haste :
" the days go swiftly by
i called . and in the night
from the other side , you know ,
when o'er the hill the eastern star
perhaps by moonlight , at their humble doors ,
i have for thee and me , ' twixt kiss and kiss . "
( in smiles a king should wrath disguise ) ,
compete for freight -- and then we 'll take
thro ' the jostle and din
on wagons hence to carry / the game they gave command
of his prompt aidance , sets himself prepar'd
in the desert waste of gobi ,
if i go to fair , or feast , or waddin ' ,
when emperors worship at his shrine ,
the searchlights sweep across the sky--
leave a history written by their
all round the house is the jet - black night ;
' but i must go on with the service
und a madchen mit a tree - leg shtuhl
and hold in victory the banquet hails of heroes between the two
flings round her limbs a garment , deeply dy'd
on whom she always kept an eye ,
aye beat their bosoms , and for succour call
in the fierce tumult struggled he ?
when she reads of robin burns--
by effulgent beams of light ;
to - morrow for the states,--for me ,
pass underneath the shining arch ,
i stuff my skin so full within
on downy pillows find a sweet repose !
for he was alone in heaven .
which is fierce enough as it is . i suppose you think he will
if so thou tookest hector 's arms of pride ,
reddened earth 's roses , kindled the deep blue
i did think at last i 'd solved it ,
though sharp may be our trouble ,
for act of hand or tongue or eye
knees of the gods , whether he shall return or not , and take
they hev ther favourites , you knaw ,
of thy deep groan
bright with the blaze , and red with heroes slain :
whose panged sobbings throng tumultuously .
and made sir gawayne feel himself at home ;
they see the lamp - oil sputtering with a growth
with cries as joyful and as cheerful face
the long light shakes across the lakes ,
and my pleased father came with pride to see
due satisfaction , and made out to live .
the routed arabs fly , she calls her priests
when love forgets his majesty
then " master ! " ... and the word rings down the years !
sin in _ his _ nap'ry not t ' express his wit ;
law - wer , lawyer .
like moons emerging from a sable screen ;
lights up his studious forehead and thin hands--
when you are made ridiculous ; will find ,
from martin pearson 's _ mottects or grave chamber - music _ , 1630 .
ulysses ' ship across the purple sea
all dangers , all deaths , they defy them ,
in vain a single trojan sues for grace ;
of fancy .   you speak truth : this hour
a league and a league from the trenches -- from the traversed
men , horses , bovine browsers ;
and felt the breath of the morning breeze
through undulating air the sounds are sent ,
which still transcends our strife and leaves us darkling here .
¡ adiós , patria feliz , edén querido !
lightness in love ! how ill it fitteth !
that weary loue at last may find his way .
but ran upon the strangers / like to a valiant knight .
on the muskoday , the meadow ,
major seemed to hesitate .
rocks at their sides , and torrents at their feet ;
into my bosom , that the dreadful might
but , in embalmed darkness , guess each sweet
which old camillus ordered , to confine
but even irish patients can hardly regret
they kept 'em bright as gold .
" fixt is his doom -- the miscreant reigns no more
for i must to the green - wood go ,
with quivering lips and falt'ring breath ,
i seem to walk like one deep in a trance
but he ai n't by ' isself in dat , in dat--
her charms with equal joy we press'd ,
then let your schemes alone ,
past dreams of childhood float upon the air ;
that yance i flang away .
sweet pages of her book ,
so bright , and gone forth utterly !
with the lazy echoes drawling
march went out with the roses . " where is your heat ? " said he .
echoes of the past come floating ,
make us , not fly to dreams , but moderate desire .
but one kind look,--and then , how blunt the steel ! "
let them fade -- but we 'll pray that the age , in whose flight ,
such loss from the fierce strangers they could endure no more .
the furnace licked and purred and rolled ,
immortal ! yearn enamoured ; or to rage
that cousin here again ? he waits outside ?
lay with the universe , at one , to dare
the eyes that loved not allah saw you not ,
the race is nearly spent ;
then many a knight of handsome mien ,
depart , dissolve , decease
but all night long amid the flames he lay ,
his weaken'd body , subdued by the toddy ,
and once , or twice , to throw the dice
the groans of anguish , and the clank of chains ,
as they march -- from the hill - side , the hamlet , the stream--
before whose flag the flaming red - cross paled ,
-- their coats by some uncourteous varlet sheared --
call'd me neighbour , and friend , brother soldier , and all that ,
for i warrant she gave him
to slay his son ere yet he can return
as of old , i am i , thou art thou !
scrawled over on some boyish holiday
while empty - handed violets hang the head .
i know you do not mean it , judge ,
for mother , wife , and sire !
the god of battles , in his angry mood ,
and what i 'd say to them i know .
but yet his horse was not a whit
they hope your useful race is run .
should a leaflet come to land
i loved to tramp .
rebounding from his horny hide , and shake
to find that little vulgar boy , who 'd gone and used me so ;
with the glow the sunset weaves .
no more the landscape 's lovely brow ,
beauty an ' truth , they darena come near it ;
then i awoke , and know not if to deem
accordingly we have him as we have him--
steal from the throng to haunts untrod ,
fair one with unbraided tresses .
in almost everything i do .
for a few moments ) represents christ , over whom death
saw no more the flocks above him ,
be by our weaker brother heard
our years of watching . there are stranger dreams .
of that high station where your thoughts enthrone me .
coeamus , retulit echo _ .
not heaven , nor hell , can shield him from my might ,
" ' what if the moon went in eclipse ? '
or like pale ghosts that darkling roam ,
to reach the distant skies , and triumph there
lily of the valley                     _ return of happiness . _
i saw within my troubled head a heap of thoughts appear ,
and virtues growing from the ground ,
that none exhibits token of the theft .
but soon as they had won their passage forth ,
" for having left , in the caliph 's kitchen ,
into my heart again and veins ,
and there , through smoke and flame , behold
sailed into the dusk of evening :
to shed its influence on thy bright career .
through sever'd shield and morion , he ne'er was whole again .
here therefore satisfaction shall be soon
against the greeks he bent his fatal bow ,
case . this bow was made from the horns of a wild ibex which he
some love too little , some too long ,
came such a son to scourge hell 's foulest lie
hands that have plucked the world 's coarse gains
slate and pebbles and wet shells
and go beneath the yellow springs .
to me , when life besets me in such wise ,
one song employs all nations ; and all cry ,
" though battle call me from thy arms
is our sinister - handed woe ,
resolv'd to die , he sought the pointed blade ,
menestheus , son of peteos , saw appall'd
we look up and , through black clouds riven ,
follow it fast , and follow it far--
and why may not johnny love me ?
all day long where the white wings run .
and ' e ' opes to be fit for another fight--
than ever triton blew from wreathed horn !
" to rise would now become us , " the gleeman straight replied ,
hath touched thee , ...
and hungry crows assembled in a crowd ,
he put out his paw for a cocoanut ,
a man his future life to mend ;
longed for the trickle of keneh 's well ,
and half conceals from pensive eyes
relating all the glories of the chase .
in a vast and vapory ocean--
sweet , as the vernal warblings borne along
of life , which i am doomed to till full sore ,
" what have'ee catched , lil ' lad on the shore ? "
ever to last !
' tis deeds that i prefer to see :
o , now she comes , and here she stands ,
for comforted i will never be :
into the dusky coals we peer ,
encouraging as morning .   as i lay ,
some recommended a wet sheet ,
o thou whose hands pluck out the light of stars ,
as the conches from the temple scream and bray .
in ruddy pomp and ever thronging mood
and shudder as her shadowy towers
baltaȝar vmbe - brayde hy{m } & “ leue s{ir } , ” he sayde ,
distinguish not : for soon expect to feel
the constitution , on her way ,
for ioye torment or for aduersite
and faith , that sees the ring of light
that the obstetrick doctor crow
and for his future kingdom chose a site .
letters to you . by uncommon , i mean their being written in such a
but broke , with this , the battle of the foe .
poisoner & destroyer - elect of innumerous unborn ?
achilles flung aside all pity , and all that conscience which at
make preparation , and to - morrow start ,
there grew upon his hoary head a crop of mistletoe .
( as if of wax had been his habergeon )
come not to me again : but say to athens ,
merrily singeth all day long ,
back from the windy vaultages of death ;
it ver et venus , et veris praenuntius ante
to soothe faustine .
that so much of the life of my life , half unknown
eupithes ' son , antinoüs , thus bespake .
to spare ihee now is past my po'w'r ,
her stubborn heart was softened , and gave way ;
for thee she rings the birthday bells ;
as fortune would have it , the stageman had fled ,
why do n't the men propose ?
and the pleasant land .
pan wnaeth dau deyrn uch cyrn cyvrdan ,
to that true life you best esteem .
from the grass rose something crackling ;
on foreign land i 'm doom'd my days to toil ,
in seats of council and the sumptuous feast :
her flowers in vision flame , her forest trees
then may hiisi make thee snowshoes .
to charm the wandering heart and roving eye ,
with friendly zeal they serv'd them , with hearts devoid of hate ;
watching for me in the pouring rain ;
over the hills . that is a memorable occurrence : there
health , peace , and many a bloodless year
openly or in secret , shall with him
in heart - playing ,
and on thy love of right rely :
ranging their irregular
" but oft have heard him mentioned , and for shrewd
with my nameless finger lift it ,
and i continu'd thus : " still would i learn
nay , who will live when life clasps hands with shame ,
finds out the deep foundations of the mountains ,
adown the vista of the years ,
fleet goes my barb -- keep hold !
victor and vanquished are a - one in death :
charm his fond ear as he walked slow along .
where is the ear that will refuse it ?
in tireless march , a thorny way ;
are the pains and the woes
oscar ostrich sauntered by as a nut came down ;
i lay .   and the dark fell . . . .   there grew
" le style , c'est de sentir , de voir , de penser , et rien plus .
as twenty days are now .
from thy tired limbs unbrace pelides ’ arms ! "
nay , rather , like a dusky cloud they seem
causing strangefortun'd comfort to melancholy mortals :
and satisfying slumber for all time .
tho ' father and mither and a ' should gae mad ,
a gracious memory to buoy up and save
here her splendid beast she leads
_ the witch [ goes on _ ] . deep wisdom 's power
the youth was tossing pebbles in the sea ;
" better you vas quit a - shpankin '
and festering carnage loads the waves or fields ;
so hard it seems that one must bleed
sleep , my darling ; mother will sing
o'erspreads with storm and tempest , from the ships
as the silence , the sudden profound isolation ,
have devious postmen blundered ,
the men observe the rules of thought .
which toward him sche couthe stere ,
his stature to the stars , or stars
and a blank is left , to be filled no more .
the tyrant of the chersonese
of more exceeding splendour , than before ,
fleeing from nature 's frozen breast , he trends to lowest crypts ,
so rich a charge , then what wouldst thou expect ?
in pure and heavenly armor richly dressed ,
bogland and melody and old bones .
i -- doing nothing at all,--
with childish pomp , and borrowed fame ,
she rocked in her wild distress ,
of ram , he - goat , or reuerend ape ;
the native duke of that renowned land ,
and i stopped and i stared , and i halted ma men ,
lo , suddenly from out the wood new shape of man appeared .
he couched his lance , their keeper overthrew ,
the hedge briar rose hung right across the path ,
but you and i were very proud !
sometimes when i watch trees sway ,
the strength of sorrow quite is overthrown .
these are thy glorious works , parent of good !
although my opinion may require apology ,
" ' tis velvet blue with gold i like . "
by wood and cave and deep ravine ;
unmov'd they lie ; but , if a blast of wind
when , tucked up , she a - hunting goes ;
t ' hoose - door is oppened wide .
of the black bridge -- poised like a gigantic spider motionless--
nor ceased the low murmur at eventide ;
that bowed beneath his gentle hand
savourless , filthy , which the foul will eat ,
all night it raged : when morning rose to land
upon the battered throne of france ;
drive into the wilderness again .
that drew the magic car
and the coy spinster , half - afraid
the bishop 's words were ringing in his ears ,
my spirit stood , and caught its glorious hue--
into long , shining signals from the panes
save that in loving you my soul still soared .
there once was a house , and a very dark house ,
kempthorn ( shaking hands ) .
to leave alone the helpless dame ,
may i turn now ? my richest self is rent ! "
the straits of hell ; here songs to usher us ,
that horrid word " spout "
round the old tree .
deeming to find thee e'en as yesterday ;
then pity in his breast awoke ,
of this earth 's darling,--we , who understand
safely rest thee in thy cradle ,
what i shal saye , of mercy take ye hede
and the bills been glad to pay .
into ampler ether , where
may more delight another 's changing mind ;
without whom venus will not long attack us .
and ther as the walle was lowyst
and bears , and bull - frogs , ghosts as well--
shatter the heavens with a song ;
she showed a readiness to weep afresh which steadied wee willie
it slips , an ' it slips , an '
i stay'd , and turn'd her music o'er ;
was set for thee to rest on there ,
with swinging drops and drooping bells ,
with the hoard of nibelung / full many stalwart men ;
together sailed they fraught with all things fit
i wot the greater grief is mine ;
snuffy old man with a goggle ,
thy love , altered - hearted .
fell flashing , and her heart took thought to seize
when may bedecks the naked trees
then was it that i heard from elenor murray--
and , quit of earth 's corruptions , shape
all the bright creatures that like dreams
who thy herds may watch and nurture ,
severely chaste , or if commenced a bride ? "
east and west and south and north
calls , with two elders , in such judgments wise ;
remember ye my suff'rings . "   with such words
who scatters rushes in a master 's hall ,
the doctrine of each herb and flower and root ,
when , presently , my waler saw , and did not like at all ,
holes in the ground ; and voices that do sing :
and knew full well to raise my voice on high ;
that gazing upon god thou dost discern it .
amid the perfumed air .
despair and resignation vain !
our way in hades here among the damned ;
sayeth some proverb old and wise ;
sing of her dark - green forests ,
_ his _ country 's ruin added to the mass
that make the circle of the vision , he
as fynal tresour of my hertes ease
as some vast rock beside the hoary deep
six the hamlets thou hast honored ,
by which man 's works ignoble seem ,
than these fair dames her poet 's honoured head .
boomed full the beaten burgonet he wore :
where dullness bears the sway !
' round which the tall pines sigh ,
must positively leave you . but i must first render you all the
gendres was that ladyes name .                        
successfully usurped that privilege , to swell both your fame and
that leader under whom on manna lived
the sky , that flecked the ground of toil
and their full swarms o'erflowed , and first was he
and everlasting power .   for the son of god hath power of all
and shrieked in terror lakshmaṇ ’s name ,
the exterminating fiend is fled--
but soon as death the old man 's eyes had sealed ,
since we needs must first have met ,
and blows the smoke of it into his face ,
the valiant sons of warlike olivier ,
heaven 's help to prosper their black vows , invoke :
from the swiftly - running rivers ,
he took his chief delight .
it was not hers . she felt a trembling stir
the courtier oaks bow in proud homages ,
the moment i shall fly from death , when , like the
til afterward into that yle ,
with his adulterate money on the seine ,
for those that burst at morn :
like to him now are they ,
" my god ! my god ! thou hast forsaken me ! "
the young , the innocent , who fondly lov'd us ,
" but the lord is not affrighted
with more ; to tell whereof there is no need ;
you merry were and glad ;
pass from the arno to the tiber ,
one stroke of sword and all the world is yours .
shine out through the doors for malinche ;
and the bride - maidens whisper'd , " ' twere better , by far ,
speculations concerning cincinnatus , _ ib . _
alone to thee , dear lord , can we
however poor or small ,
and they ate the last bit from the dresser .
there 's space for you and me to walk apart .
its green arms round the bosom of the stream ,
like . in this case you will drive him from the ships even though
it makes me long to sail for lands unknown ,
brighten the light of the sun ?
her that dares be
more than our singing can be ;
perhaps thy turn will be . "
the dear resemblance of his native coast ;
the dancing table .
of the synagogue                                   a.
make me teachable and mild ;
blanketed soldiers sleeping . in the stark
into elysium rolled away !
turned towards the golden image ,
the dead , unassuaged and angry , silencing us ,
but mov'd by rev'rence , answer me , who burn
" tick tock ! tick tock ! ' tis nine o'clock .
( i think , my dear , i ought to know--
from clover - field and clumps of pine ,
at liberty for such employ . "   to whom
see britain sunk in lucre 's sordid charms ,
say , how many men thou hast
ad te suspiramus , gementes et flentes
fairest maiden of the northland .
and that he was n't in the least
is your war - pipe asleep ?
schal stonde upon so gret a lost ,
shall sleep as sweetly nevermore ,
consciousness .
the poor indian , justly called " the poor , "
to whom their glory is not manifest ?
solution of the maze .   what i have heard ,
until , lord surrey 's rear - guard won ,
from the trees of every forest
so dealt god 's waters with us
that , sir , is scorn'd -- it is the impious stain
or resemblance of those superb avenues of large trees , which
now is my lover -- ah , who is my prelate but you ?
in sixteen - eight - eight his bigot zeal
those martyrs that hang from the gibbets , those hearts pierc'd by
keines römers schnöde habsucht soll dir je dein grab
he seith that other have schal
but young , with no protection near ,
he found the mine was rich . for years he worked
here and there the fire has caught him ,
his thrift thy uselessness will never scorn ;
his hobnailed way to work !
up the airy mountain ,
an ' we kep ' 'em to a hair ;
for ráma is but mortal still .
so worn the harrowed surface had become :
the words you breathed have reached his ear ;
as the tempest and the waves
but not to me .
and pleads his cause as loudly as the best . "
the night is dark now , and i call for her , " come back , my
makes for the river with long steps and slow .
one tree leans up against the high brick wall ,
and thou know'st thine own ;
these , o'er the deep , rapacious plund'rers roam .
there stood i still as any stock ,
let me walk long beside you in the sun ,
of all that set young hearts romancing :
our fate is theirs , will reach them all;[z ]
among sere leaves and twigs , might all be heard .
since the beginning of the world , and not the better thereof
for thee , by our law , no alternatives were :
_ edition limited to thirty copies _ .
his strength fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is
albentisque lacus altosque in gurgite fontis ?
and on their bare knees adown they fall
the droning beetle sounds his hoarse bassoon
follow some roving lion 's spoor across the copper-
and if i do , when morning comes ,
there 's naething warms the heart like the noble scottish game !
why do i do that for ?
the small - note bill 's a blessing , tho ' _ you _ do n't know why .
still this world of ours rejoices
but knows how all the dry - drawn furrows ache
but still it does n't seem quite fair -- it does seem very queer--
i deck the charms but poorly prized , till late ,
and happiness therein a lying fable .
came a - droppin ' to our ears .
a small green mead of dry but spongy ground ,
and while the twa talked o ' their puddin ' divine
ocean - stream , measured the sea - ways , churned up [ the water ] with
children that know no wrong , darling !
pity me not ; but let the world be fed ,
forgotten ? wait ... i still can sing--
stoled for the work with beauty nigh divine ,
and no sun shining ?
far by the windmill , the old ruin , when
orpheus tacuit torpente lyra
  the servant who attended kant in his walks .
when thy flesh lies [ in the grave ] . behold the sky . count
stript ignominiously of armour , glaive ,
blazed on her arm , and lighten’d all the field :
bore she the crimson trace
thereupon wild lemminkainen
shall they complain
that bore it , compassed round by a bold
here make i proclamation of my faith ,
leaped as if to meet the arrow ;
my palace is the people 's hall ,
till the arrested life , with throes at last ,
but scant is the mercy prince vaudemont will shew ! "
εύφημήσαι . kennedy rightly explains it , " abstain from expressions
and there lay them safe and sound ;
" he had white teeth and stared at us with his black eyes . "
so i dare not think of his dying soon , as he surely
the monarch 's limbs were stretch'd ; and with their king ,
is solitary ; since no more his board
to the celestial sirens ' harmony ,
thy lofty hope , thy lowly prayer .
gave it to devarát the sage
" as thou hast many years before foretold
above the tree - tops and above the houses ,
a narrow house to share with thee
bequest of a forgotten clime .
thou hast whate'er ' tis lawful to advise ;
a swerd , worthe an erllys lond ,
the flocking shadows pale
uidi paestano gaudere rosaria cultu
were poised and balanced , nor the war had given
he made his pleignte unto the hevene .
of things long since , or any thing ensuing ?
and with them built a pyramid ,
of a roman equerry ,
tell me , my heart , if this be love ?
it is for her who watches alone at night with her lamp burning .
where summer never dies
love , high in heaven beginning and to cease
it is so long ago ; and men well nigh
' tis a bobolink singing among the sweet clover ;
so sweet each minstrel ’s voice who sang the praise
" then surely she th ' original must be ? "
hopping round her , about her , hence or hither ,
loomed like a bubble o'er the town .
to the sad ear of grief from distance blown ;
unclean animal out of pagan nations knew its master 's crib . ' but
there our glad eyes shall jesus ever see ,
¿ quién las pudo librar ? ¿ quién de sus manos
this man were occupied ; he might no few
to his good wife joan ,
the greenwood holt , of beast and monster fell ,
but turn the eye to life 's sequester'd vale ,
sad soul at war with sense ;
i will banish thee still farther ,
the immortal gods that spared not for her wail
the waters babbled low ; the errant bees
there will be no such wizardry when i
the trembling surface , by the motion stirred ,
but i 'll no , & c.
and glimmering wave , and rugged tower ,
and feel the steady candle - flame , and taste
and i am sorry . wait a minute , father ,
along the brink of the vermilion boiling ,
marks the hour of deadlier strife ;
the beautiful trinacria lies in gloom
what ! a face that 's speckled
with little folk living in good - children street .
some die , some fly , some languish on the continent ,
weeping ' neath the thongs of leather ,
if slightly worn , she 's pretty yet ,
the night winds eolian breezes , vol . iv . , 265 .
  see note 235 above .
" or any other part , where men adore
the man who had to swing .
i could n't get high prices ,
earning , with governed sense , the prize
for my own use , one slice of bacon ;
flood at the critical moment when the hero ’s destruction appeared
and that made him surly .
could once have mov'd ; then in the key - hole turns
of the whole world go on nor drown
and shot such deadly glances from my eyes ,
trembling hypsipyle uplift
for the unrighteous murder of his son !
but when an acid is mixed with a pure alcali a combination is
“ triumphant now enjoy thy reign
a scarlet bird went sailing away through the wood . . .
dirt - daubers each had chosen a spot
then did kauko gaze around him ,
the days of misery ;
wandering sunless between the walls of the houses , and stealing
from whence its name of lethe on this part ;
arrived on the olympian heights , she found
gone , gone , so soon !
" --well , all is strange !   i am craving
yet may we gaze upon you from afar
the rapt sun floating overhead
of lights that lure and dreams that thrall . . .
lorn symbol of the long oppression of his race . "
of you , beloved ,
about me ever blossoming
tends his soft charge ; nor where his daughter rosa--
who flounder'd , inly burning from their scars :
with thy yellow hair so lovely ,
heard you how the fight has gone ?
“ thundering with mighty clash , with terror struck
and at once the sweat broke over my brow :
as this wonderful iagoo ,
and to - night i greet thee here
rather than trust him with thy favourite boy ;
" no other world may share those stores
and , like a benediction , happiness
oh , blest institution ! the lord owns it still ,
till they touch her shoes of deer - skin ;
actin ' in charge o ' bazar ,
leaves thee , prevailing province , to complain .
she has given it him out at the shot - window ,
as if the healing hand of christ
the drowsy grasses droop--
we knew ;
when now minerva saw her argives slain ,
their long cries enter the blue clouds ;
sitting at the golden gates
beneath what mossy bank enshrined ,
set a thousand guards upon her ,
and saved and slain , and crown'd and made anew ,
from trusting one that never payeth ,
they went their ways , but wore a lifted look ,
his feet approached the path of ill . ”
and the long debates and delays that were made ,
there ’s the doe , the roe , the hart , the hynde ,
where brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings
his qualities ( with them ) into sublime :
who with desire to see him fills our heart . "
the muse in silence drops her feeble wing ,
they had caught childhood from her in a kiss ;
with steel and polish'd elephant adorn'd :
mature beyond the logic of his years ,
who , in the vision of the mind infirm
and tells the town the pleasant news :
as have nor law nor king ; and three of these
hopeless the evil is , i have not told its history ,
with him a martyr - trio grand and free .
la funesta ponzoña .
ochone for poor castalian drinkers ,
at cock robin 's wedding .
gazed at again with such insulting homage .
your bosoms are her bulwarks strong ,
when did my gifted dream beguile ?
bogdan will not yield or horse or falcon .
hear the joy bells ringing ,
and keats is thankful for fanny brawne
but little it availed , for wings could not
she saw , and purr'd applause .
god 's living temple into ruin falls .
and there it is the tiber 's flood amidst a pleasant place ,
sine query .
' e 's taken tickets on ' is own ' igh worth ;
keep my king safe this very day . )
the air we breathed was hot with blame ;
on this my beauty 's throne ,
the dozen peers from death have no warrant ,
he named them and distinguished them as i do .
on sword and shield and burnished mail ! "
the nile , forever new and old ,
home , friends , and honors , -- i that have lost all else
to me and these my fellows / that bear me company
` for other wey is fro the yate noon
i outs into the street again , and to meself sez i :
" even as once i wo nt to see her -- such is yonder woman 's form ,
the way they entered in , they must come out . allow
of famous london town .
there could n't be,--for the deacon 's art
now there were dreams , to the machine .
as swift to love .   i did become at once
of gods and worlds , that roll thro ' misty grooves
and tell of how he passed as " brown " ,
a hard , unwaking sleep has overpowered
thou -- thou and i , when love was all in life ,
nor made a weeping town thus widowed by the sword .
and variable as the shade
lo , in yon islet of the midland sea
lur'd with the smell of infant blood , to dance
this one thing we do know,--
beneath the church - aisle stone ,
a hue fro heuen i herde þoo ,
slipt , and the art was lost !
bottom of thine heart ! but come , no more let us tell of
and some of them are water - fouled--
under that palm with the lion 's mane ,
sartin - sewer i bea , thot a weant niver give it to
and hung about her neck and wept ,
oft , to the clear - seeing eyes ,
for ne'er , from vizor raised , did stare
it is the month , the jolly month ,
with very special force ,
fair palace - structures decorate the land ,
who say to us in slander 's breath
soon will the holy priests be here
" o heart , my heart ! " she said , and heard
& syþen on lenþe biloogh{e } ledeȝ inogh ,
friends , through your manhood and your fealty,--now
never was earthquake so mighty that it shook a tower as violently
to watch with still approving eyes
to the high - hanging rocks to bind
and whatshername for sale ?
by the thick darts the giant showered .
claret and cream commingled ;
commend his blood and righteousness ,
close by the guard , fresh vigour pallas gave
with fear we tremble , we with anger glow ,
could so coldly take thy hand ?
by mix'd sensations ease th ' afflicted mind ,
left foot ! right foot ! lines unbroken !
with thine for fervour ; none , in watery ways
and scarlet grain and ceruse , indian wood
which to the sky restores the blue serene ,
bird of the sea ! bird of the sea !
to haunt , to startle , and to pierce .
all escape cut off by the sea , and the sentinels near them ,
fancy might deem the lesbian 's own ,
had come on me , a princess theretofore .
unknown to saturn 's son , and all the gods
fish , flowers , trees , rocks , the panels bore ;
cursing themselves , and others cursing . "
for they must needs go whom the devil drives ,
king ring in state was seated at yule - time drinking mead .
and one , if she would rest , would show her bed ,
and in the pause they gather strength again .
which hearkens ever : " lord , within thy keeping
linnet and thrush were still ;
on morvale 's breast!--and through the noiseless door
for the dear face i nevermore shall see . "
nae weel - tocher'd aunts , to wait on their drants ,
thy monks abode till jesus came ;
for weakness life has not confessed
the daring damsel , fair dordona 's boast ,
bed - time
when the angel says : " write ! "
for all his past transgressions ; him here in bonds you see ;
adapt thy light to his form of night
we 're princes in our own right -- our sceptre is the flail .
from blacker cloud ne'er issu'd stormy blast ,
my dearest love , since thou wilt go , ii . 153 .
and , through the window , love creeps out .
a volume which , i dare to say ,
by his own dauntless heart and savage force ,
dwelling in the familiar woodland grottoes of the nymphs ,
to guard thy city from surprise . ”
near as they can , approaching ; and they can
beyond the fight , his flying coursers stood ,
perchance is come , when you shall fail from me ,
the junks of weal - and - woe
  published in the _ freeman 's journal _ , march 13 , 1782 .
  _ apulia _ : the south - eastern district of italy , owing to its
bugles and trumpets of the holy war .
and hot as hot ,
a mighty maze ! but not without a plan ;
on a mistress who can dole
cras istud quanti , dic mihi , possit emi ?
" then , leicester , why,--again i plead ,
while the ploughman , near at hand ,
by natural law , was motion e'er so swift
mantles lined all richly / from collar down to spur .
and by and by cometh the simple , rural rosebery ,
have i deduced my observation ;
a foot above his venerable head ,
for i will go to him who once was here ,
to a more divine and perfect love .
or as the past on memory 's tablet rose ,
listlessly dreaming i stand .
the tumult and the shouting dies--
clear and gentle stream !
a modest plant ; soft shades of green
i wot wel thanne a betre prest
chibiabos , the musician ,
jungles and miry places ,
the years came and the years went,--seven in all ,
i join with the grief - torn muttering men who
whose voices mingled as they prayed
improbus et duris urgens in rebus egestas .
as a mud - puddle seems deep as heaven for a minute ,
pretend sometimes to knowledge .
maker has moulded me with a new deathlessness . "
bring , then , these blessings to a strict account ;
upon a rustic bridge a chap
he chose not in the active stream to swim ,
he 'll sit in the barn
i thank it god , as after myn estat ;
death wound a thin horn through the centuries .
and the squirrel , adjidaumo ,
supple and strong and fit ,
on which the angry fiends of hell
we forsook them , unheeding , hastening away in our flight ;
he falls ; he fills the house with heavy groans ,
there is my lord of guasto , not alone
i had no right to speak .   oh , shame ,
so then , from eve and serpent he began ;
thus writen in a bok i fond ;
with his own thong ,
until oblivion hides him from their power .
thy ways are all so wond'rous winning ,
ye who shall marvel when you hear her tale ,
or mossy stone , or rock with woodbine crowned .
thicker than arguments , temptations throng .
the wilful face that hurt me so ,
then , suddenly , would come a shower--
had reach'd a thunderous fullness , on those cliffs
or treat of radishes in april .   nine ,
amid the unpitying tumult of his mind .
with a smooth brow for every crisis ,
by this his friend , vnto his harts delight .
prescient to - day , of want to - morrow ,
which makes their crew mad , but us loyal hearts full glad ,
with the rolling firmament , where the starry armies dwell ,
to paint it , or eat it , just as he lik'd best .
the mercy of the comber that shall end me .
to the mocking - bird with keats 's ` ode to a nightingale ' ,
or amid the waters send them ,
which hamlet tells us is a pass of dread .
for the dimples in her elbows
he smote anew on the marble stair .
they gat them to the thicket , to the deepest of the shade ,
his hand upon his gun , as one who says
for those that here we see no more ;
newman , metre of his _ iliad _ translation , 262 .
like some immortal — indra so
and to - morrow on the shore
why do not all fresh maids appear
here sprang the healing herbs which could not save
and names , like " villain , " " hypocrite , "
to the vessel of wainola ? "
with spouting urns and budding statues crowned ;
and am on earth and see the light . for thus will i declare
drops that from my fountain pure
for mary to bring forth .   moreover ye
cheer'd the heart that fears no wound ;
" be lodg'd in corners dark , or kick'd about !
the dawn now blushing on the mountain 's side ,
o'er which , from level stand ,
' twere well if his exterior change were all--
o how laborious is thy way to ruin !
or aught else that is mine ?
" but you 're only a boy , young fellow my lad ;
home again . "
a collection of poems by this well - known author of italian ,
" that art should force their blossoms and their fruit ,
the altars reeled , the hen - ens shook ,
that upon my pulses wrought :
fresh is the green beneath those aged trees ;
twenty marks , along with an equal annual sum , for which the
through life 's hereafter ,
declaiming from the central grassy mound ,
through the deep brine ye fearless may put out
shall guide my visionary tread
under the opening eye - lids of the morn ,
hector ab andromaches conplexibus ibat ad arma ,
to whom antinoüs answer thus return'd ,
it reaches hither , it swells me to joyful madness ,
--and the two revolve round each other?--said the young girl .
volcano : natheless the terror 's [= e]normity was there ;
do as you have in charge , and briefly touch
sonnets after the italian     richard watson gilder
a light , not born of noon nor placid star
when he was gone -- the children -- what to do ?
to you , alone upon the morning - height :
and whispers them o'er to the coral shells .
in the years , years ago , when the true - hearted women ,
thou my brother 's son .   no strife shall rise , no feud grow up ,
blade that goes through life
for , saving your presence , to her ye're a saint ;
and with small patience wait fortune 's leisure ,
fictitious stars , and glories not her own .
" oh ! haste and leave this sacred isle ,
that all has been a dream . alone i stand
than ours there cou'dna be ,
until the utterance became a spell
and the scalps he won were numbered ,
be this a woman 's fame : with this unblest ,
soor , sour .
rad - er - er too tan - da - ro te
fighting for leeway for laughter ,
love and life shall still prevail ,
and a low breeze crept moaning by,--
jayadev hath writ above .
refulgent rise , with new - born light .
stand i ' the stool when i hae done ,
do mothers still their school - boys pamper ?
and now that he might come to this fair end ,
children , will you think of that precept ?
to worship in simplicity
turtles and doves of diff'ring hues unite ,
ye shall fauld me in your plaidie ,
what seek ye or find ye in your random flying ,
redoubtable spears that suited his hands , but he did not take the
rose the full notes , now parted off
has purchased it of late ) ,
said , ' nay , surely she were quickly overthrown ,
' tis fine to see the sunshine ,
and would through hatred of the bays
his hoary locks
ten thousand men on the pay - roll , and forty freighters at sea !
ere i fled from a fear that i could not see ,
" oh , beauty , oh , sweet soul , oh , little love of ours--
the providence that regulates all this
when king sugríva will invite
ineffable , divine,--
with heav'ns artillery fraught , come rattling on
shall hail thee harbinger of slumber .
wha stood without , half cow'd , half cheerie .
since colin is gone ?
at night there came a sweatin ' as left me deadly weak ,
but dreader sight , could such be seen ,
sweeter than youth , clearer than greece ,
and shut herself up in a convent , dear jack ?
alas , alas , the children ! they are seeking
bearded with flame , blazed in the eastern skies ,
the groves , the grassy meads , and high - bred mares
as one who stays the sweet wine in his mouth ,
when clamour that doves in the lindens keep
with wars and horrors overspread ,
into our souls . all things are seen aright
stretched in his last - found home , and knew the old no more .
que canta entre las flores
and your support and shield ;
make you music that should all - express me ;
it may be rather worth your while ;
and in this wise , soth to seyn ,
though the fog be dark around us ,
and lo ! a sudden lustre ran across
when ' hey ! for the hour of the race in flower
as brooding upon age , when veins congeal ,
but had ye seen the philibegs ,
from my locks dishevelled drive you . '
of love and loveliness borne back
jove thinking of his pains , they pass’d away ,
nor seek the confirmation of the world .
the commonplace i sing ;
van tromp 's proud besom fades from sight ,
what he would be unable to deny
do nt grieve , my good fellows -- he hail'd them -- i beg
then may the huntsman speedily o'er take her . "
corpse after corpse they cast
monkey his godlike glories ; so that we
where'er the press was hottest ; never slacked
black horses go , with load on load
march in and pread,<54.2 > or starve the garrison .
he 'll drive , they tell , jes thataway
and all the pines in golden pomp are dressed ,
" he thought and answer'd : hardly waking yet ,
the chidings of the headlong brook ;
the cassocked priest rode onwards ,
to the call of trumpets and the sound of drums
there 's gaun , miska't waur than a beast ,
to love you seared ; i have no happy days
" with pleasure , sir , i will comply
elysium 's fields , and proserpine not heed
as by the sabines bidden : silent both
they blind all with their gleam ,
to walk in humble ways ,
i too have lived remembered hours
with every tart a triolet ,
perched on his neck , beneath his lee .
hir love , and longe er that sche changeth
the dusty street .   " ah , mademoiselle ,
the garden was quite full of pinks
cogitat , is illogical : for quod est in specie , non nbcessario in
out of the hedge that he had come to mend ,
that truth might vanquish error , and once more
as if that any one from whence they came
cross the river of tuoni ,
the warrior they with volleyed stones would slay ,
the bird of heaven hath still an upward wing ,
had rendered me importunate to know ,
and claim our fruit before its ripeness fade ,
but to his son he gave a spartan fair ,
but , bear the mead - cup , edith sweet !
he from his shoulders tore his robe , and beat
a noble lady is in heaven , who sighs
their thudding hearts affrighted to espy
i heard the hucksters bawl ,
the red grape in the sunny lands of song ,
and i pray to dream for ever
vvhich when she saw , she freshly gan to weepe ,
some pretty precedent extant .
_ he proceeds on his way . _
falls and sinks into its bosom .
that now and then a madman or a seer
above all mortal beauty , as was hers ,
side - glancing , and frightened me ;
where waves of the terek are waltzing
is rather shine than shade ,
our hearts , whose high affections burn alone
straight began to shake and tremble ,
fast fettered in a thousand chains :
" take your bow , o hiawatha ,
when the champions win the game .
coward , wilt thou murder slumber ? slay an old defenceless man ?
then , when the plug , a dead one , can no more
our souls shall be leviathans
quite harmless and still ,
if eye or touch do not relight it often .
so unrestrained it is , like a mixed fight .
the former , skill'd in many a curious art ,
a mock defence his coward heart believes ,
on my ladder alone can i climb to god .
but when they had poured forth and had drunken to their
once ' twas the custom to make war with swords ;
the living fires that warm us :
and kepe togyther thy hurte and tonge alway
and seizes on us .   god ! he goads us so !
all sought to vouch the quarrel of that redoubted dane .
be . what is all this disturbance that has been going on , and how
the sneers which now are rife ,
like suddenly yielded gates .
before the dawn , amid their sleep i heard
to expound to the world the new -- thingummie -- science ,
it 's forty - five more up the rhone ,
with other wars my song shall burn ,
" the good and righteous he away doth take ,
glancing , his tail upturn'd its venomous fork ,
ambition lent it a new tone--
and kept their stands , or rather where the powers
of these and of the others will i tell :
their garb , and with such graceful fashion dight ,
from the tents of my people afar .
proclaimin ' loudly far and near
_ his robes are sprinkled o'er ,
you trusted i could feel
" to which all human powers should tend ,
through streams of blood , to heavens of victory still .
with many a silvery waterbreak
changeful ever -- yet meseems
heart - music that could stir thy heart alway ;
she can not go into the mud !
from westward , a shepherd without law , such as must cover him
" alone , ' twont do ; composite , would i make
the doubting , disobedient soul ,
fullr er hann ljoda . "
the man who is kind and who practises righteousness , who remains
to a heart in port , --
instants in the quiet , small sharp stars ,
to moor and tie my boat up by the end
to what i feel is lord of all ,
is also found in wits interpreter , by j. cotgrave , 1662 , 8vo ,
winks upon the german maids;--
the drop humane : then thus impassion'd cried :
i 'd do to gain the rhymes thereof ;
you meet a feeble flaw ;
" ' till every soul in pleasing dreams be sunk ,
( the sun begins to sink . )
of our ears that are deafened with service ,
save the milk of her feeding ,
fast held them , and vociferating each
romanzo sings :
and now the shape ,
who ( for they had the martial maid outrode )
we 'll spend our peaceful , happy days ,
the warm - eyed child of sympathy ,
those words , that would against them clear the doubt .
that man may know he dwells not in his own ;
in that strange , apathetic state i lay ,
curious paraphrases of " the psalms , the proverbs , and the book of
and lasses married at sixteen ,
moor behind moor , far , far away ,
how glad and thankful i should be
land visioned by my more than sire , whose soul
ever to my sense revealing ,
you could go its channel in the shade ,
of pitfalls opened wide and yawning void !
the monitor was gone .
as he was bird , were golden ; white the rest
as a whole wood grows lovelier for the wail
of his breath with the waltz became blurred .
rejecteth no beholder ,
i listen heartsick , while the hunters tell
germany , deep melodist immortal ;
whan he himself so wolde drecche ,
from miles around , the autos drive .
echoes from that holy wall ;
the image of transfigured motherhood .
that tyrant , in his rage,--
compete for freights -- and then we 'll take
but there was his trail , and the way that they came ,
and gift of godlike fire to make you fair .
" i smell seven little boys ! "
and i , nor less my pardon should obtain ;
as sure , for ever , of almighty jove
we would n't have you different if we could !
and in my hands i found both , laurel bough
have we shrunk , in the wild apprehension
braying - sweet , turn - up feet ,
and fresh , and pure , and free ,
sympathizing tone .
plagued with uneasy dreams ,
and the hearthstones all were moving ,
tripoli , berniche , ptolomitta viewed ,
oft his fote sal find a spurn ;
yet -- sayst thou , spies around us roam ,
" ugh ! " the old men all responded ,
that word declares , that " he who had not spared
" o time , whence comes the mother 's moody look amid her labours ,
canto viii . the fifth circle.--phlegyas and his boat.--passage of
you need n't be afraid he 'll leave you this time . "
" long have i sought this day should bring
did he wear purple in the world he saved ?
bands behind and bands before
and this cries , " forward , though i can not tell
former husband , her city , and her parents . she threw a white
and wish'd that others held the same opinion ;
issued in form of words , such as my heart
of speech and silence , standeth still ; whence i
their blossoms spread , great albuquerque , for thee !
" first , give the high gods honor ; for good or ill ,
and with a twang her flashing wit descends .
whom enoch took , and handled all his limbs ,
oh ! he was fair and beautiful ,
are perhaps inserted here with the idea of forming a six - lined
boil thou first i ' the charmed pot !
in the cause of royalty ,
drink this , my spouse : perhaps thou’lt ask to whom ?
to him , was just beyond ;
when last we met him he had much to say
" the morning dream still hov'ring o'er my head ;
the ten mules stabled by the king 's command ;
the newspapers and magazines .
conforme con la divina
shining through the lofty chestnuts ,
thus to the earl did say :
shedding new lustre on his old descent ,
  ' o ye , who have hitherto been following me in some small
firmer in health , and greener in their age ,
if thou be none ,
with distant eye broods over other sights ,
tarry ye not ,
the landlord 's tale . _ h. w. longfellow _
be brave !   be true these days !   will you forget
filled with emotion , the rapturous throng ;
as fast as one , on either side , was slain
while the gentle angels lift him from his bed .
o'er which lieutenant - colonel yesouskoi
of all consuming time still down doth mow ,
ah , would i might lose sight of things unpleasant :
who sware to me , he'ld have me for his mate ? "
the film of night flowed round and over us ,
to bring him news of this sore strait of ours ! "
and nobly took his twenty - five per cent .
and make yourself more saint - like day by day .
et courir moins comme des lières
descend in silver silences and dews ;
rises and slowly swells,--ever increasing the heat !
raptures in the leaf - crowned goblet laugh ,
then loud he bade the volleying thunder peal
but to give royal order and injunction
he raised the dead to life and light ;
my empty heart shall crack and break ,
may read in thee ;
put him back in the sea , and put him back quickly . "
and bloody paths her treacherous feet are set ;
" for hear thy doom , a rugged rock there is
con las uñas lo despluma
holds the best o ' things , forsooth .
only a little heart ,
than golden beams of orient light ,
on what might harm him , or perhaps destroy ,
the crisp petals remain
cold cloud , but yesterday
who finds no rest upon her down , hut oft
they 'll never end ; for when i 'm dead
not truth , but figments to truth opposite ,
' medio tutissimus ibis '
o noble erpingham ,
" her frederic 's dead;--there needs no other blow . "
and play a friendly round with me . "
and years went over the earth , and over the sea ,
brutii , on the coast of etruria , famous for its copper mines . it
and those who pacify with blood accursed
for her , though god has made her gentle and endearing ,
well - fitted forth to reach thy native isle ,
" now heaven him quit , " said gunther , " that with so fair intent
and bless our farmer girls !
and well , i ween , she play'd the mother 's part ;
their eyes must open almost ere they close .
he who would solve the future in advance
" oh , what hae ye brought us hame now , my brave lord ,
sponge - like exudations fair--
a newsboy and a peanut - girl
'cause doc he 's rid these roads and woods--
along the dismal pathway .   step by step
the grey wood - pecker taps and bores ;
and o ! before you hurry by with ladder and with light ,
begot by phyleus , the beloved of jove :
like the wings of birds of passage seen against the hazy skies ;
counsel of pride is wrong : we 've fought enough .
_ for young king erik erikson _ .
and our decaying fold again be fill'd ,
the franks shall perish in despair and shame .
yet was not strong in bodily might : the gods
with a shout of trumpets and roll of drums .
the troubadour he downed
behold his tail , my friend ; with curls like that
he is like a ship that at anchor rides ,
on him with doubt and pain . "
ascendeth into heaven .
and the gates of its water - streets
as thou dost say , no flattery is needful ;
now , while beauty is shining ,
then danced the bright apsarases ,
i only have a heart and hand
lat me look into thy face , jeanie ,
the like did also giselher ; his honor counsell'd this .
your homes , your wives . forestall them on the strand ,
was heard in all the country side
he come back for bizness , an ' here he will stay--
and yesterday the youngest son ,
when a slave bursts in with the cry :
quand me les dit ta voix
of danish clan . but comfort and help ,
v. 130 valdipado . ]   cacciaguida 's wife , whose family name was
bot daunger , which welnyh me slowh ,
for us to know the beauty of the sky .
also that dwelt in anemorea and hyampolis , and about the waters
could grant me this ; but -- are you kind ?
i thought , ' if , despite this lie , he strips
many good works i 've done and ended ,
thy lone adoring suppliant pray !
but dullness has stout legs , tom ,
my bell branch murmurs : the gay bells bring laughter ,
they kept the noiseless tenor of their way . "
but why he said so strange a thing
down ( as some mountain on a mouse )
ah me , my lord , this lowly bed
how potent to deject the face
saxum circumspicit ingens ,
or neighbours bent from house to house
the stranger spoke : " thy bitterer grief mine own ;
at the height of the fray ,
pure orient pearls , rich diadems .
drains from th ' exhaustless store for all earth 's streams ,
and then be soldered down ,
and over whimpering tigers shake the spear
and night her boundless dispensation held ,
and lopp'd and lighten'd of their branchy load .
thus i set my printless feet
like doves in the air ,
a jarring thud on the wall ,
yon broad , bold , angry spark , i fix my eye on ,
some folks , i know , hev gut th ' idee thet no'thun dough'll rise ,
" who dare to face me ? woe to the parents whose son stands up
their happiness may dwindle away , & what was at outset
my heart is full of deep - felt praise ,
the everlasting future , that his merit
_ in all christian affection _
on countless glittering scales the beam
when on its leaves i look ,
beneath the pines within this shady dell ,
" why should you want a husband , when you have
the fellows will go home to where there fall
ah ! vanished many a busy year is
is life worth living ? 253 .
" my man , what are you doing there ? "
over the shining sand of your desert
and it is soon extinct ; thus from the horn ,
but one bright hour allow ,
when ' arf of your bullets fly wide in the ditch ,
o dearest eyes ,
voici un peu de nous , la chanson basse
and down the iron stair we tramped ,
and on the wall just opposite
including nuts , candy etc .
warm and sheltered , your prize and song ,
and tears like mine will keep thy memory green ,
of the mother 's heart , and her baby 's life ;
pure - hearted , lord of senses and of self ,
and then lick their faces to show
above his head , wide - spreading dark wings warm ,
as caulder kirk , and in't but few ;
arrah , paddy malone ! you are now safe at home .
judgment of hyperion is correct when she says : " o es ist so ganz
no relative at all to that lewd toy , the violin !
the ladies of st . james 's !
{ 79 } for the reasons why it was necessary that the night should
and bound for greece we plough'd the watery way ;
that feebly shew'd the state in which he lay .
the uncontrollable mystery on the bestial floor .
there 's life in the old land yet !
et alti marini equi ( i.e. fluctus ) plangebant in littore .
produced by volition , sensation , or irritation ; because they soon
oh england ! sinking england ! boast no more .
along the western shore , whence nile expelled
i said " such storm within so fair a breast ? "
now to the bloody battle let me bend :
at least i ca n't discover such felicity .
down through the ancient strand
my heart i gave you with my hand ,
fell on my cheek . as from a deep abyss ,
the song we sing together , dear ,
" since i 'm to be door - keeper , " replied the champion true
when athens trembled to the people 's will ;
that first mild touch of sympathy and thought ,
i 'll meet him shortly when the sky is blue .
we looked at one another
cadger , a hawker ( especially of fish ) .
for the brave and tender woman ,
but now that night when she , with many a kiss ,
and through the bushland throbbed a croon
and we heard that he was dead .
the house of laughter makes a house of woe .
carry them on and keep it up--
mote every worthi prince entende .
his voice ' tis i hear , in thy earth - shaking thunders ,
or that the growing ages steal
never a note , never a trill ,
o honour'd queen , o faithful followers
we praise thee , wielder of the sweeping sword ,
¶ here commeth remedy in and to him saith
the winter o'er ,
the impalpable air . down and down ,
gu'tchew ! gu'tchew ! gu'tchew ! man ;
and thou , my sweet dove !
oft in slumber 's deep recesses ,
for heavenly visions ; and consent to stop
grew brighter at her smiles ; and , if the star
o take my hand walt whitman !
are by evil spirits haunted ,
and nine sour dogs complete the rustic band .
where forms of more familiar mien ,
and the even country of the sava ;
as the smilin ' faces there .
who sang of " annie laurie . "
on hope and eats our hearts away . they 've burnt
now see the triumph of its reign complete !
the whole i felt for him to you . "
you 'd shout his praises . . . yet now it 's odd !
was like a little ear .
in the embrace , man is devoured by women
" antilochus , if you would have me find eumelus another prize , i
my head i 'll willing forfeit / or thyself my wife i 'll make . "
and the sun gives way for night ,
the lily and pink that i worshipped
how passionately it opens after rain ,
the bonnie lass of ballochmyle .
upon a blade of grass or bit of rush
all must have reference to the ensemble of the world , and the
eyes , completed as fine a specimen of physical and
stood out to sweep the sea ,
and the leaf the boy in me hated
" o thou ahti , son of lempi ,
peace through the windings of our way ;
thou young - eyed spring ! gay in thy verdant stole ,
" when shall this slough of sense be cast ,
' tis the trace of defeat seen so soon ,
with the old world to the grave ,
that airy cadence stooped and bore me in .
already . and if she shall find that thou dost speak nought
' mongst others ; whereon i , compelled by fright ,
by elibank and yair that lead ;
good - day , sweet mistress .
you wo n't deny the lantern is n't new .
que pensé un momento :
that nothing comes by _ chance _ or _ destiny _ ,
susque et deque fuere , inquam , omnia ludu ' iocusque . ]
and speak when he is spoken to ,
in all his force serenely clear ,
straightway were the wounds united ,
when she forsook mine home and marriage - bed .
and where goes all you take thereby?--
so wholly bound to me , they would have thought
why thus sink in sight of heaven ?
mahodar , mahápárśva died ,
in on the lists , and there unlaced my casque
and star -- yea , of all being .
a bonnier sang frae lovely jean .
th ' immortal gods above the issues hold . "
it made me love myself , as i leaped to caress
then run away .
for myself i will not sorrow -- nor for aught to me befalls .
and the far - off voices of childhood
the visage , hyperion ! of thy sun ;
unable longer to resist ,
i , willing to obey him , straight reveal'd
and drop among the bending roses
a sudden rush from the stairway ,
" me - ow - ow - ow , " says my friend on the tiles .
so they , among the ships , conferring sat
or was it the moan of a sinner ?
call’d—“thou king vukashin ! vain thine efforts ! —
our spirits round a shrine ;
you would gain and not lose for my sake .
that from being the last ,
and cheviot 's mountains blue !
i keep , by him forbidden to unlock
spigoting two high windows over the west river ....
for i love you still better after the sensual
the end lies ever in my thought ;
what god , what hero , wilt thou sing ?
the prayer is heard -- else why so deep
but being too happy in thine happiness,--
to paralize the vultures of mankind .
down by the sally gardens my love and i did meet ;
and still the pensive spring returns ,
now it overvaults appledurcombe ;
that gentle enemy of hermit vow .
immortal ? oh achilles ! blind with rage ,
and forth sche wente prively
unchanging woe , and endless misery ,
but they that cast her spirit into flesh ,
who , soon as one forbids him , would fain pass over all .
moribus antiquis res stat romana virisque .
rebellious , them with fire and hostile arms
that evermore upon god 's errands go,--
versunken und vergessen ! das ist des sängers fluch .
l'angoisse ce minuit , soutient , lampadophore ,
breaks on the low horizon 's rough black rigour
i 'll give you one far better in exchange ,
what if i work these owd fingers to t ' boan ,
sorben voraces el fatal tesoro .
those heroes in their harnesses avoid a cannon - ball ,
_ shooting star _ . trailing from the sky i shot ,
but twenty years have pass'd since here i came ,
when the calm night arose with modest looks ,
before his eyes that love 's far fires illume--
as if jove 's gorgeous leman danae
was sacrificed thy son ;
the tyrants , who claim the command of the main ,
i bid not , or forbid .   do as thou find'st
give black and white an equal vote .
with sweet confederate music favourable .
behold your bridegroom cometh in to you ,
as babel 's builders stamped their sunburnt clay ,
the blasted pine and the ghostly stump ,
now they wander loose and sigh
of this fair forest dame !
one sole eternal godhead , of whose love
and fondly bade her all her wishes speak .
` is , as her conqueror , by a dame received ,
where harshly clanked the saxon chain ,
“ chersidamas , and charops ; and to fates
let vernal airs through trembling osiers play .
praise , and response applausive ; nor the sea ,
tho ' _ what _ they were we now forget .
an airy bridge divided worlds may span ;
entice the dewy - feathered sleep .
pendulous , and foreboding in the view
in your deep floods
who slew his phrygian charge : and last a shout
but neither milk - white rose nor red
whiter than the sea - foam
there 's one that i love and i cherish the best ;
brown skeletons of leaves that lag
but here the port of peril is ; the foeman 's
the band , ill - tuned and loud ;
of his and our patroclus — " this , no more
wearied that night we lay foil'd and sullen ,
passion and reverence in a single spring
god knows my heart ! i twittered like a leaf ,
or octopus or eagle or tarantula
they proves that british industries
ought i that impulse to obey ?
curse their own soul .
with tawdry music and cigars
by his bedside ; pale , beautiful , dewy with tears .
maddens then with blacker riot .
laughing , talking to his harp
perhaps , a national defect . ”
partum quartum , peredecentum ,
but the moon shed forth no lustre ,
and the steely points are meeting . "
and , this thing thinking , all those ruined ones--
these are the social pleasures , my god !
changeful is woman 's mood , and varying with the day . "
when her very best she 'd done ,
we 've shrouds of neat post - obit paper ;
he travelled like a hunted thing , hard harried , sore distrest ;
ancient testimonies
the water in desperate straits like frantic fish ,
while rosy boys disporting round ,
cold in the grave to lie !
beneath another heaven and stars unknown ,
in their ancient way .
for this in such as him seems strange of mood ,
yet may she never with a circling course
what characters unheard , unread ,
and all the land chaonia , from chaon of troy - town ;
o fairest phoebus ! father of the muse !
when the blue day - light 's in the skies ,
though sober russet seems to cover all ;
but never lady like to this ,
and did not understand .
vent on do say ,
one hunting cry more ! oh , master , come nigh ,
and that and most of my dresses are ripped up ! "
i meant to tell her how i longed
and the drift is scudding fast ,
all on a market day ,
his giant foe no answer made ,
i will drink with her in gladness ,
and moralize ;
shall change , shall become first a peace out of pain ,
dost think that time , to whom stars vainly sue ,
thou seest no cavern roof , no palace vault ;
had to that holiest anchoret bewrayed ,
" sometimes it sounds for turning wheels,--
accept for monitory nourishment
the banner you bore is furled ,
hareȝ , hertteȝ also , to þe hyȝe ru{n}nen ,
o ' tis not in grief to harm me ,
i fear its going , ere the spring days go .
traveleth toward the land of heaven ;
easily a worm might crawl in ,
where the bones are rudely broken ,
treacherous and false ; it smiled , and it was cold .
which to the top from height to height impels us .
says to him : " sire , on you this cause depends ;
as round a point of land he beat
roams around the rocky caverns
she drops her sword ; she nods her plumy crest ,
overweening band of angels : the lord sent away on a
through echoing skies the thunder pealed ,
all the principal men of ithaca itself , are eating up my house
it sit hir nought to be celestial
i will enrich myself with two half - maunds of wine :
hang for sale in the bazaar;--
and there the surly village churls ,
and the song which forever will rise on its air ,
in the light of a midnight moon ! _
broken in pearling foam .
' t was a french pope ; and then so long ago ;
eventful stories of forgotten days .
leaped on to the great threshold with his bow and quiver
yet thy head needeth a circlet rarer ,
an ' sum said ' t was a lee .
remained distressed in mind ; since in what way
made her couch along the wayside ,
waiting the yeoman . all the panes
" maiden ! hast thou seen my steed ? "
far off , in thoughtless indolence resign'd ,
within the rain 's grey monotone .
attila .   they moan :   ' tis he !
the winds that will be howling at all hours ,
o what a gale was on my speerit
the soul of each one , loving , who the truth
and wide in ocean toll'd his echoing knell .
since on thy couch of death thou lay
will curse her fatal obstinacy for it !
last year it was an unknown man who came up from the sea ,
bay does n't stay in the stars any more ;
from battle , till she bring me armor new
scarce had i her blessing received ,
eight times emerging from the flood ,
' your life is but a vapour , sure ,
the gods themselves , can in one tavern find
they heard .   god and their parents they blasphem'd ,
it grew to be time 's burst of dawn ;
till her blood was frozen slowly ,
illi compositis primum docuere tigillis
with one whose converse you despise ;
said the lively lemminkainen ,
as thou shalt tell if worth and courtesy
" a stoory that wur tell'd te me ,
nor in their fall had zeus availed them aught .
deep coreopsis?--heavy hues
lots of little things these hands can do .
is not the pilgrim 's toil o'erpaid
did pinions infernal rejoicing sweep by ?
she wo n't leave again .
well it becomes the favorite of fortune ,
when first his voice the youthful maro tried ,
when i found i could not go .
apples , moreover , soon as first they feel
put this drug in the bowl , and had told the servants to serve
and i 'll never come back ,
evil angels tempt us in all places .
and feeling hearts that hold me dear .
' then hermes departed toward high olympus , up through the
families . by rev . f.d . huntington . 18mo . fourth edition .
and the blackened stalks of mint ,
draw close the war and drive us on the prows
to wake again where helen and hector move .
and shut mine eyes , and steal my breath ;
on the beach they saw the spittle ,
hunc studeo ulcisci : et prompta est propria ultio uati .
since i saw their ghastly ray .
" he of gallura , vessel of all guile ,
but winter has yet brighter scenes -- he boasts
bringing brightness and the odor
trust in god and do the right .
te uolente . quis huic deo
our monarch of the mighty bow
follow the quickest one ,
still the blessed mother stands ,
hear a roaring and a rushing ,
and for one little hour the earth
and worship the mighty dollar ,
being abused , teach poison , the most violent destroyer ?   doth not
this to disclose is all thy guardian can :
for help at such time who can well refuse ?
fevers and lethargies and pains of heart ,
they call the name , but mincius , till at last
it seemed to bring me back the skies of may ,
did'st thou compel , or did i willing leave
section xiii . rávan doomed .
to keep at bay
deflected much of me that lived as he lived ,
old porches it discloses ,
shut against them , barred securely
while rousseau 's lips a lackey 's vices own,--
of this twin riddle of the hat and the romance .
no madding crowd can turn to wrong .
then late , refresh’d with sleep from toils of fight ,
when their light weight the tender feet shall bear ,
changing to a promontory ,
and with lamenting cries
from the meadows sweetly dripping ,
nought our pleasures to annoy .
our army at manassas .
foretold to abraham , as in whom shall trust
discard , in parting , all their late disguise .
endure great cold or scorching heat , and give
the dead man sank into his grave ,
what things she said , how sweet , how wise ;
the lights , the songs , the flowers -- and the pain .
" but there he sleeps -- and i wake here
i wol amende it after this ,
and higher , i ween , is that mystic might
from the little cups of flowers ,
be'avin ' like a bloomin ' fool .
and run the risk of storm of stones upon the cyclops ' shore :
as dad mcguire leaned over him to hear ,
but love doth aid his votaries true ,
thy blossom - buried junes , have smoothed its scars ,
then the coffee was spilt , the e - boat rolled
h[o,]rmuligt vardh hjalta vidhr ,
melt away--
pardon ! i heard you here declaim ;
children and fools the words repeat ,
for which their cries might beat against thine ears ,
oh christian load your gun and then ,
than all new life a livelier lovelihead:--
pants to view his glorious face ,
except to read the papers through and through .
and was on the point of rising and rushing out into
who led the bravest of her sons to war .
on this side nothing ; and by proof we feel
which youth would not act ill to keep in mind ) ,
and you 'll grow old .
unnoticed by all other eyes ,
lest she escape and law be unfulfilled .
tunc quoque praeteriens uulnera multa dabis ;
and see the opening morn ,
" if all the weans in all the world , " says
lost and bewildered in the vast desire ,
why , father , one would never think to see thee
though since that time three hundred years ago ,
beneath the stroke of heaven 's avenging ire ;
whom neither shape of danger can dismay ,
with spiced imperial dust ,
and green for ever be the groves ,
where with strumming of tambourines
a pure , rich crimson , without mud ,
i have a friend called " silent bill , "
i hear thee trumpeter , listening alert i catch thy notes ,
in the realm of dreary lapland .
of that ne'er forgotten summer ,
to watch lest snares beguile our feet .
lead up , lead up , until the years
with a latin motto
of the moon beyond the cloudlets ;
near to our side , darted an adder up ,
having erased one mark from off my face ;
periwinkle , blue                       _ early friendship . _
that luste to norysshe trewe loue and amyte
why did she have to die like that ,
to write and ask the judge ?   he ca n't be hardened .
we were his people .
the spirit of departing light
hinted that we need not care :
god ! of whom music
these fourteen lines were all he could allow
when up he jumps , " there 's land i see .
behold her fair and greater daughter { 1 }
shakespeare 's sonnets .
the very brightness of the sun
and struck four - footed , with an earthquake 's jolt ,
that nought may break her rest ; her waking smiles
no evil can befall me--
here is sunshine enough ,
with blame requite her , and with evil word ;
frightened them back .
i the eternal fair , the eternal young !
rocks were fastened in the ocean ,
of may bent low with the sweets
of this ethereous mould whereon we stand ,
u said , " an urn , with water hot , place underneath his chin ! "
griev'd at amphimachus , his comrade 's death ,
stooping to this side and that to cull the snaky stems
the small accomplishments i 've tried
the tiber winds , and the broad ocean laves
her floore is all this flower ;
or excellent plums , but not if they 're high ;
new torments , new tormented souls , which way
in the kingdom of tuoni
and mocked above the murdered dead ,
and all his sark thereafter has he torn ,
plunging his sword through peoples ; streams unknown
i will sail again to my own !
the kin of the stormy soul at the helm of all - being !
_ ca't _ , called , driven , calved .
could come at that last stirrin ' bugle call
depend upon ' t , they 'd better niver stor.(4 )
it brings to brows of poets crowns of pride ;
his stock of wealth hath near outrun ,
he took his plumed helmet from the ground , and his wife went back
o my publisher , how dreadfully you bore me !
of grim necessity confineth there
he is hiding -- and the air
descensus averni -- he knows it ;
and the medicine - men , the medas ,
two prettier mice were never seen ,
care and age come unawares !
my mouth is open ,
an ' weary winter weel awa ' ,
i thanked him for his amorous zeal ;
" neow is the winta uv eour discontent
rushed against that mighty host .
who knows what lips were kissed at laracor ?
we come from the gloom of the shadowy trail
for nuts , stored there in autumn - time ,
love bade me follow in his chosen train
whose fury ofttimes bends the spirit down ,
and all the soul of all the past was there .
to the appointed place , a greensward where ,
seas gleam with sails , and wall - less towns secure ,
i ask no presents , no reward for love :
i will tell him all my sin ;
and lerne to breke it if his small power can
in thoughts of joys that might have been .
be far , ye foes of virtuous poverty ;
the thirty pigs , at one large litter farrowed .
midnight , the long , long chime ;
and autumn grows , autumn in everything .
so snatcht will not exempt us from the paine
the ant toils up its grass - blade ,
fevered lamps are set to stare
and onward on~ the thr{e}.aeuro(tm )
shall bloom the thunder - blasted tree ,
now , johnnie seeing naething that
ae leg an ' baith the trams are broken ;
jones , the tobacco - jar !
with reverence the angel in her palm
to - day the distance is superb ,
both knights now made them ready for the fight ,
of distant waters , mocking their distress !
the dazzling wonder , fresh from vulcan 's hand .
in time to come with mightier blaze
god who stands afar off , and created the universe
in the green woods , and meadows summer - shorn ,
yet the reviews , who heaped abuse
rained on all sides from invisible hands till the ground was red
till tired he sleeps , and life 's poor play is o'er .
music , drawing , languages , and food enough for seven !
another is of both his eyes bereft ,
i doubt not , when to you it doth impart
tie the strings to my life , my lord ,
land , sea , and aire , and every kinde that lives ,
pagan temples own her sway;--
and to the mercies of a moment leaves
" i shall not lose , nor you , "
nor held , but quick rebartered thence to thee :
and consign'd all his rights in this gay exhibition ,
what is it ye whisper amang ye ?
ever new self - expressive forms to find
" and who is avis?"--hear the tale
there 's sound of distant thunder .
and flamed oleanders near the sea ,
in many soubtil question :
the owl shall match the nightingale in tuning of her lay ,
in endless mirth
i can provide anone ;
on his brow an angry frown .
nose around , to -- to seek out inquisitively .
" such love 's a cowslip - ball to fling ,
continuallie subiect unto chaunge .
that knocked at my door again and again .
i could as sure secrete him from the stroke
i saw him at the ball -- as is his wo nt ,
but if it fortune that any lernyd men
rich crystals of the rock she takes up there ,
and mental physic the diseased in mind ;
o , that sad breath his spongy lungs bestow'd ,
and here 's a cheer to the night that 's gone !
and why feel i thy heart a - thumping every time thou kissest me ,
glory , and verdure , of life 's summer time !
aureoled in sunshine ,
shall succumb to age and melancholy mould ;
therefore with fluttering soul she trembled sore ;
hidden to his belt in water ,
she yet was forc'd to tarry and that last hope resign .
in air , that somewhat gusty shire ,
found lore and love , was tutored and carest ;
on the cool flowery lap of earth ,
- liker the clod flaked by the driving plough ,
a circe -- mystic destinies divining ;
singing me wild songs .
the panther 's roar came muffled , while i sat
_ chorus : _    weaponed with stings attend her !
misshaped , unlike themselves , and like naught else .
the one i 'll shoot at twilight - tide ,
little plain utilitarian gowns of quiet tints of green ;
the day is done , and the darkness
come , let the burial rite be read -- the funeral song be sung :
discuss the peace , the armistice was signed ,
if my roots are in the sod . "
o she took him to her father 's cellar ,
through wreathing clouds of smoke .
if you have seen , through mist of eve ,
all in the gorgeous dawn of day
what matters it to thee ?   there is no thee .
on which his mater dotes .
if folly grow romantic , i must paint it .
i met a man with bandy legs ;
wake with the dawn , unfevered , fair , and strong .
dusis      = west ,
dined , and danced upon their heads
the dreamless silence of its sleep ,
" this folk that presses unto us is great ,
like whirlwinds , whose contending sway
the horned moon , with one bright star
could i but hear you laugh across the street ,
of a magnificent castle we arriv'd ,
who seemed to roland little past fifteen ,
eunice awaited gervase by the river .
not to the curious or impatient soul
god set with noah , presageful of the world
let me confess that we two must be twain ,
for if i saw thee once transform'd in me ,
memories of the middle ages , when the emperors , rough and bold ,
and nanny will thank them again and again .
enow of such , as for their bellies ' sake
" nor only one . "   the two heads now became
will fear no ministerial frown ,
from morning till night he is smoking and thinking ,
comes .
as the loud flames pulse and flutter ,
light , light eternal ! veiling - place of stars !
rode cock - horse on the city maces ,
a better part by her . that is the way
by the brands that still were burning ,
thus we , descending to the fourth steep ledge ,
to know if any human eyes were near
that the sun we may uncover
i stood with the dead , so forsaken and still :
in the darlingest tomb of lovers .
till i had no more strength left in me . "
falls the next moment :   nothing meets his sight ,
the great works ( fragments )
and sand ,
save atreus ' sons alone ? or do not all ,
as thither did their parents seldome come .
you rise to - day -- while crops are up -- how then
down the blue marsh where crows to southward fly .
and thou wouldst shame to vanquish one , me - thinks ,
sometimes also stood for the armlet worn by gentlemen in our
" we all must own old sam hath won the day ! "
through winding alleys ; and lo , wonderment !
i 'd sooner be a whifflin ' arter mack'rel in the bay .
they wound below a savage bluff
while , as they melted on her eye ,
then how the emptied vessel , burning sore
" h'm ! i hope you kept the price of a return ticket , " hilary said ,
beside the hearthstone where the flame - flakes fell ,
snip was sous'd in the brine , but soon rising
on your wide plain they join again ,
her hand soft touching , whisperd thus . awake
the wind - god ’s son , in form a man ,
and strike my brow against the crystalline
the sea 's withholding
was moved , not of myself , to a tune like this .
into vain citadels that are not walled .
and now proceed , without delay ,
i feel them at my heart !
be palpable , and proof apparent urge . "
and the heart of young jehangir , like the dove , had
who is so faint , that dare not be so bold
which find but pleasant ways :
_ alack and woe is me _ .
when rural life , o ' ev'ry station ,
or _ perruquolithus_--a specimen rare
and end
i lived with a good old woman ,
as soon as the fire burns red and low
am i a god?--so clear mine eyes !
with pain , its ruins i descry :
thus , through a world of innocence and sleep ,
“ by all the gods and goddesses above ;
may in some future carcase howl
are as the music singing thro ' the years
these words it added : " wherefore tear'st me thus ?
her green quiet years , changed by gentle degrees
together joined in marriage rites divine :
and wheel'd his stout steed short about ,
not , you will understand , in joke ,
three choice mrs . nortons , all singing like syrens ,
and their source , the mother 's eyelids ,
hast thou come a goodly distance ?
when the bobolink is silent ,
unfolding every hour ;
she herself , careless child ! was her love for him aught
with bow of ash and arrows of oak ,
his spirit in them taught :
with voice of godlike pow'r , talthybius stood ,
and it is passing red because it was the last of three . "
some thin remains of chastity appeared
sea - shore .
so far as not to blind me with his own .
the carnal malefactors were condemned ,
howling , like a wolf , flies the famished northern blast .
to those who are misty , ' tis mist on the beach
bradamant knew to be the wicked count ,
walk up and down the room , and dance away her cries ,
nor pompous cares , nor palaces , he knew ,
great iron ships or walls of wood ,
the priest ’s brother
fierce as ten furies , terrible as hell ,
and let your silver chime
self - seeking , coward fears , the hate of man ,
unto this height i did aspire :
who advertise the tailor 's art .
nor the snow continue pure ;
distressed by the broken skies,--
" i would know why , " -- he said -- " thou wishedst me
defiance to tyrants , and death to their minions ,
" it is finished , my lord ! "
i will arise and follow
from granting he , as i from begging , peace ;
ye holy stars ! look down with tender eyes ,
cries the fox , ' while our oaks give us acorns so good ,
and never change her for a new :
so long the sharer of my heart and mind ,
  aeneas .
lusus , delicias facetiasque .
after it had become embrowned with blood ,
mighty chimes did keep
from ilus son of mermeris , who dwelt
and lord of all this revelling .
no other child was ever known to thrive
that does the task assigned , he kissed her face .
to meet the lovely kriemhild the royal sieglind came
and her delight
see also ambrose , _ hexaem . _ , v. 24 , for an eloquent passage in
' dear lord ! it hath a fiendish look--
moan ; but when now it seemed to them little avail to go
there 's nothing that i would n't do
among the sweet - breathed cattle
go ! guard the private and guard the chief ,
but sing a slender song . " now , varus , i-
happier thou mayst be , worthier canst not be :
by śyáma ’s name known far and wide .
and part of bambrough shire :
this lady of the west country ?
studding the moss like silver ; and again
ah , no ! i can not say " farewell , "
he said , and acting what no words could say ,
hortor amare focos , arcemque attollere tectis,--
must wander thirty - fold for all the time
will shelter us till rain has ceased ;
where the banks are narrow ;
gilpey , young girl .
here clan and saddell ; there swing baird and i,--
who rode so gaily by thy side ,
a living wall , a human wood,--
and yet not long , for , ere the starlit skies
drag themselves like purple swine across the plain .
a carpet of downy snow .
thee and thine arms from troy aflame fast have we followed still .
to flow with beauty , breeding fools and worse ,
some sang a song , some cracked a joke ,
the same astonishment will seize us all .
you did not see the bitter trace
and numbers more the muse forbears to name .
and the side proudly rising , more than line
though at first she feels confin'd ,
straight and even was the seam ,
wasted my life . and all the winter long
of wommen in the same cas ,
wheeled , pale , in a chair , and shattered , the wreck of their hero
then my lips for a moment were crushed to hers--
z stands for zany , that brings up the rear .
and seiz'd for his supper an innocent sheep .
to see thy genius gather root ;
do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us much
tiny finches , green and golden ,
striving to rise in vain ;
and since to look at things in bloom
iron hoofs , iron wheels , iron din
and the dim lake reflects the evening star ;
a suit that at noon was a garment of white ,
and like music on the waters
of many evils chose what seemed the least .
vainly the constable
dat mijnheere jacob van artevelde
of mute petition fell , the rains
proof of the judgment of god displayed in the duel , according to
or , if my wishes have presumed too high ,
and eik his handewerk ,
“ will always burn ; time was it burn'd not yet :
you might have dreamed their souls had gone
betwixen kine and kine . "
the bosom 's treasures it would make its prey,--
i see the lacerations on its hands ,
in my necktie of red and my jacket of blue ;
and grieving france and italy ; and oh !
" the humble holy heart that holds of new - born pride no spice !
with blue and gold ,
bold captain muggsy comes to bat , a batsman he of note ,
and murmuring , " i am thine at last ! "
at nightfall , glides a sudden trail of fire ,
there was na gane a week , a week ,
and if my fate so early had not chanc'd ,
it 's the case of a empty dinner - pail
whom collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity of his wife
she turn'd , and she blush'd , and she smiled ,
dining with one who well knew how to dine us ,
and short and quick , and full of high sentence .
" bank the house . "
set up their e'ening ca ' .
poor tuff , a wanderer forlorn ,
from past the moonrise and its guiding star ,
i should find some instruction , no doubt , for my own ! "
and the foolish ardour , soon abated
say , pines not virtue for the lingering morn ,
the soft " good morning ! " of my daughter 's kiss ?
my little pretty sweeting ,
to sit and taste , till this meridian heat
to her ; for her the willow bend ;
wanders o'er the desert sands ?
decorated seat inlaid with silver , there was a footstool also
early , too , and clouded thy downsitting ,
whose blushing smile floods all the orient ;
does not stumble in the pathway ,
then took telemachus a loaf entire
none but the brave ,
these slender stems and roots brook no control ,
one over there on the water
' t is merit to have borne a son so brave .
platoon commanders , captains by the score ,
the glad , glad days , and the pleasant ways ,
and rest thee so .
trample the red rose on the ground,--
pardon , my loved one , pardon ! i am guilty !
let us share the holiday .
it is the self - same love that wastes us both . "
rogos componite ;
not thou alone , o poet soul ,
and he fell fingering at the staff of it
and with her choir urania must assist me ,
from the plumes of hundred grasses ,
where all my lead soldiers are lying at rest ,
the flying car , o'er bodies of the slain
for my apprenticement--
we must away and wait until she dies ,
and it was fastened by a gold brooch with two catches for the
castor and prize - winning polydeuces .
cast thy rays , thou fire of ukko ,
oor only aim is te expose ,
to all gallant souls
among the many lovely things
in mannes kinde of every vice ,
" oh , who are these that kiss and pass ?
the somnambulist was in a very happy state . on her lips was the
even thro ' the blood - marks left by camden there,--
then , o'er earth 's war - field , till the strife shall cease ,
clung to the idea that sensibility and thought , which they have
then come , and on our distant shore
next moment from bastion to bastion , all round ,
even to buffetings and the crown of thorns ;
and all the while one dreadful thought
( without a metaphor ) can speak , or the muscles utter intelligible
and lo ! the thought of him
all hail'd with uncontroll'd delight
a long life's - day i 've taken pains
you 've cause sufficient for your carriage ,
the blackest hue to milky white ,
and years sin syne hae o'er us run ,
and there for delight of so gladsome a sight ,
and haggard , while athwart the panes
who gave me freedom with the air and light .
thro ' the green land
world - renowned grecian hearts .
may be washed out in blood from our forefathers ' graves .
the bloom on the farer 's face .
nor ever hurt the tender ears below her as she ran ;
there was an old man with a gong ,
that magic may o'erpower ;
" then some malicious god conveyed ulysses to the upland farm
the vaporous and inflam - ed spume .
for fame 's a carthage not so soon rebuilt .
he passed that measure , if the strokes were more :
but i must hie me home again
with orient colours waving : with them rose
which name was fitter ) wears e'en now her crown ,
praenuncupatus ore qui prophetico
shall walk the wet sands by the edge of the stream
like a flame upon the water is my little light canoe ,
" be patient , peers ! ( at length antinous cries , )
in spite of cain 's red brand ,
betrayed the secret places of my soul ?
and so we sit down to our crumpets -- and tea .
straightway fire began his roarings ,
and scarce the herd gone to the hedge for shade ,
' here to the houseless child of want
nac addef dy rin i lafar .            liberabunt :
down through the valleys darted out of sight ;
o'er the valley of almhin lowering ;
_ miss ramsey _ : " only one , thank you . " she takes the cup .
" if you will say impossibles are true ,
" she can brew and she can bake ,
known ev'n at troy , a city , by report ,
but on a sudden beam'd an inward light
how shall we reach the great , unknown
to first offence the doubting guenever .
nor joy in every place .
and yet so wicked , too ?
adorned with gold , about his waist
displays a man 's capacity
and vistas with no pathway thro';--
` leave father , mother , ' said the voice , ` and win ' ;
hubo un tiempo en que andaba la modestia
our definition of poetry throws much light on the subject of the
at length they reach the land,--if land that be
the garden gate;--he is going past !
and tell me , have we won this war or not ? _ "
_ london published june 24th 1799 by t. heptinstall holborn . _ ]
with fire prepared , they deal the morsels round ,
in the flesh the bone then fasten ,
“ if any one in our band has helped
for trap - doors we 've plenty , on sidewalk and entry ,
rose on thee , or what candle pierc'd the dark
ad benedicendum delectandumque redacti . "
that uncommon old man of blackheath .
give me your green bowers and soft seats of rest--
his vigour grows ; unwearied is his mind ;
now , in far battle , beyond the south sea ! . . .
" to the man who sets them free , "
--lift thou me higher .
and cut a poor figure when pressing the trigger
say , why yet tarries he , and where ?
" o rise , my child , " her mother said ,
half - wakened from a midnight dream of blood .
if juster battles are enacted now
to his hated bedside .      his behest they performed ,
that greeted the musician 's lay
the green and crested grebe he would pursue ,
" i 'll ne'er pay mail to elliot again ,
dragged noisily along
yet she would bid him away ,
true , there were people who demurred
since i limped from a scarred and riven field
yet full of beautie , next he did beget ,
made her bed upon the pathway ,
you _ fête _ the finest men in town ,
to you ' tis a vain dissembling -- a part of the work of the day ,
such jubilation from his golden throat ;
and put him in a stall , and leaned
an ' proud o ' my town an ' my shire ;
and passes up the stairs .
before baptizing . o how far removed ,
come back again , jeanne d'arc !
“ steal ' mid the darkling night ? and find his way ,
and fettered manhood labors for release .
whose infantine delight shall be to wage
art , and that art at nature did repine ;
thither swims the lovely aino ,
to the eucalyptus belt .
to light thee to thy bower !
where that same treacherous wax began to run ,
the king , first offering prayer , his listening folk addressed :
" the spectres said the place was low ,
and we 've bought him a _ byootiful collar beside _ .
ad solam dominam usque pipilabat .
in english and in wryting of our tonge ,
till you quiver with delight to the tip of your tail ! "
canto lii . the exit .
“ reach to thine ears , or no ? do the brisk winds ,
people fell upon their knees before the image , and bowed them
therewith he takes the tale and all he openeth orderly :
send messengers everywhere to the cities of the
seemin ' ter stump me ter come clean 'em out ;
if you could n't have fun .
that moment lives forever , and the sight
rosalind 's scroll             elizabeth barrett browning
nor in less honour than his spotless wife
up yonder -- mind more strong and subtle darts
whose bubbled rubies maiden feet did bruise
that some of them sing all night :
" there was a youth , once on a time ,
came , clothed upon with beauty of goddesses ,
which moves thee , is less harmful ; for it brings
a fellow of a college , how , i pray ,
the light is grey upon the lonely meadows , and the villagers are
a sere and yellow leaf ,
after life filled with sorrow , till , spent with the strife ,
will flicker in the newly opened leaves ,
and men be the ships fishes trace ,
your mother bites off for her supper .
to jest up killock , jam right down their hellum hard a lee ,
( as porter , hillyer , did invite )
like a fragrance in the mind .
the fettered thalaba ,
north and south with the fickle tides ,
how did you live ?
looming out of the sea ,
the pond , with all its lilies , for the leap
do we behold thee , wearied as we are
that mayne has issued a decree ,
thick , thick ,
when jason they beheld a ploughman made !
full calm thine image in our love doth lie ,
thy tyrants fear us ;
till the rippling current brings you ,
heard the songs of the magician ,
corrects ; erases ; alters ; now dislikes ;
kindling and calling " onward , you
dreams of the summer night !
as with some dreadful witches ' ecstasy ,
and the measured tread of the grenadiers ,
and ocean flames with artificial fires .
betwixt the cedar - branches .
even to madeline 's chamber , and there hide
he thought his looks was killing her ;
and there , thyself , amid the myrmidons ,
when she slowly turned from me ,
the novel , i should add , gives the name of the chieftain only ,
and watched the moonlight , cold and white , which poured
i am the sweet ecstatic note
like yáma with his noose in hand .
then full of jealousy , and fierce with wrath ,
slowly descended , and with right aspect
where is your drowsy breath ?
a gleam of the shears in the fading light ,
gentle thoughts , and calm desires ,
they threaten godfrey ; he prays to the lord ,
from hope and fear set free ,
i would say what i wish'd to have said when you came .
burn them all to dust and ashes ,
by the helm that keeps us still to sunwards driving ,
drooped the eyes that will remember
the sun may set , but constant love
non quicquid fodit occidens
good lord , deliver us .
you to invint
against the king himself array the host
of his almighty engin he shall hear
the tumbrils toiling up the terrible way ;
as are the deepest bottoms of the main ,
lingers still our parting kiss !
valiant love < toc.1 >
and don the ermine , with its fair , false claim ;
and halves her existence in woe or in weal ;
the bee hums round the woodbine bower ,
he waited till the dawn of day :   then touched
debas'd to each obscene and impious use ,
beneath the lusian flag ; a vanquish'd prize .
steer towards her coasts , yet skirt them ; far away
things even up before we die , as every old man knows .
and now , in ways heroical,--
to make a full atonement / and amends to thee .
in act to throw , but first prefers his prayers :
leaves one old thing new ;
burnt by the sage to ashes , they
then the gray - haired mother asked her :
and , after pallas ' death , live ling'ring on ,
swore feal to the romans
si dolor amor est .
for when with victual satiate , deep sunk in wine , his head
a dream of youth eternal , and of -- you .
with that , achilles bade prepare the bed ,
stant that planete which men calle
" _ tales of the mermaid tavern _ " where certain poets and
these whims i have explain'd , to prove
i make 'em out clearer and clearer ,
the farthest from the fountain .   god is love .
where the boys had hacked for angle worms ,
of the plan . the alternations of life and death , of cosmic night
the poets of to - day
the mistress of the lonely parsonage
the public throat , or stifle honest thought
and the true orient , christ ,
art bright of face and clear of brow .
gibbering , yipping , with hollow - skull clacks ,
of the sea .
and ask , why cast down ? why disquieted , opprest ?
even _ thou _ , who wept because the dark was great
man was not made for forms , but forms for man ,
as under its nose the old witch peered up
these as a line thir long dimension drew ,
' twas like a torch - race -- such as they
to paint forth their fairest fair ,
to walk in honesty , good sirs ,
an empress in high womanhood :
by some sacred inner fire ,
and rhymes that i 'm unable now to quote ;
and though from these thy embers we receive
for -- if my fate is to be chosen
painted for sight , and essenced for the smell ,
nor fly in a flutter , and leave in the gutter
they silently inhale
who , that ever hath heard him -- hath drank at the source
the raindrops on his [        ] track
suspicion , in some tempers , might arise
when the curlin ' days are o'er , a ' the joys o ' life are tame--
it was consistent with their _ christian _ hearts
on the flying heels of june .
she plucked this flower , and , as it 's sweet ,
upon its walls from kathleen 's face !
she crowed at my back dō ' .
god is love ...   i understand .
his choyce of friends not many ;
or jove now gives us peace . both are from jove .
there lies a vale in ida , lovelier ,
rune xlv . birth of the nine diseases
the carpet , when they lay it down ,
" what hast thou , my soul , " i cried ,
angus , the heir of duncan 's line ,
the vsurers : fals cristen men in theyr byleue
who now , perhaps , in phthia dreads to hear
and there , at last , it finds repose .
appals not him ; he draws his lonely breath
in thy great mistress 's arms ! thou most divine ,
at the foot of snow - clad saentis ,
sith he of rome , and of rome 's empire wide ,
praetors , proconsuls to their provinces
true love and affection for govt . bullock train ,
and with a wicked lying tongue ,
stand in their porches , and enjoy the show .
oh , what would have been young beauty 's doom ,
volunteers , chiefly from the regular service , was engaged , and a
vos quibus rector maris atque terrae
and slow must be that warrior 's feet
died at night , alone in darkness .
hath dwelt , and he where i ,
his hand to make him out of joy and moan
when i did on his wants attend
and what a fine specimen was grown the other day in north america
while ministers , still worse than either ,
whom pow'r ne'er corrupted ; whom learning adorns :
gleamed like ishkoodah , the comet .
from their own herds and fatted flocks a feast
laying aside all useless rhetoric ,
a washed - out smallpox cracks her face ,
" _ the case is proceeding . _ "
and every shape of earth ,
laden with silver enow and gold
the darling of our crew ;
i -- i have lived and loved , and you have lived and have married .
on the hillsides , and set a - flowing
thou art unwilling we should part ;
sat down protected , and from out his foot
" how the leaves came down , " by susan coolidge ( 1845- ) , appeals to
there 's worser things than marchin ' from umballa to cawnpore ;
but they knew!--
of clouds unrolled ; each cloud a mighty breast
and all its myriads only move in dreams .
with all mute lips are laid .
there came a people face to face with these ,
flecked with purple , a pretty sight !
' grows , lives , and dies in single blessedness ; '
the people hurry up and down ,
mind incline toward it , that inclination is love , that
a lion fierce that hugely roared and cried ,
under whose king the world of old was chaste .
poets whose stars had paled before the sun .
" oh ! thus , " i exclaimed , " may a heavenly eye
choose a firm cloud before it fall , and in it
but later know i little , if she twines her wreath so gay ! "
god was with my mother there .
for they were many , and had scattered wide ;
terrace and palace , arch and gate
_ dominus flens ad judaeos . _ luc . xix . 41 .
you 've got the brains , you only want the will--
whate'er my grief to find her less than fame ,
( poor beggars!--an ' do n't we get blown ! )
de mí tú yrás mal baratado ,
and in a huntsman 's bag thou oft art found ,
to love one another you 're too like by half ,
who his triumphal progress has begun ;
and to his shining mouth the flowery food
visions of triumph to the dullest eyes ;
so with thoughts my brain is peopled ,
ro - bin and rich - ard are two pret - ty men ,
while hell 's red lamp hung quivering o'er his pen ,
anything to me is sweeter
had not yet blazed upon their eager eyes .
thrust through the fatuous ,
a man that is ' andled an ' made --
what shall their speeches , what their errand be ?
she gat him upon her back
black night behind the tamarisks -- the owls begin their chorus--
this man tydides , now so fiery grown
the moonlight vaults beyond the trees
no envious breaths then my deserts could shake ,
in thoughts and joys which sleep but can not die ,
will get as bald as a billiard ball is ;
still is seen an ancient mill ,
this know , how soon soever i return ,
" i had made plans ; but i am done with , i.
and i for truth have heard it said
no goose lays good eggs that is trodden dry .
for standing artless as the air ,
and all her fine ethereal frame
saith : ' hearken , lords , and this your hope a little learn of me !
whose sandy sides washed by the ocean wave ,
unmoved by the rush of the song ,
known . it receives its name from the greek χάμαι λέων , ‘ the lion
of the fleeting power of men .
delicatessen windows full of cheese--
misuraste le strade del mare , colle mani batteste ,
a stream of curling smoke ascending blue ,
around him at his summons came
our heroes slaughter’d and our ships on flame ,
and lash their sides with undulating tail .
said major blowney , my employer , one afternoon ,
and fell exhausted every minute ;
like bees that labour gladly on the comb .
so fair aurora doth herself discover
did earth not flee before me , when the breath
and his hose were red , with a purple sheen
there is but one escape .   you know it ?   good !
and oils of fragrant scent , a copious store .
of night o'erflows with dew the phantoms pale
which thei forsoken everidel .
and finds it to - day or to - morrow ;
with place and station to keep
they to the moorish king the risk displayed
buzz drowsy sunshine minstrelsies .
the trojan force shall still be backward driv'n ,
nor bread nor meat will she bestow ;
this wonderful one , alone , at peace ?
with all the stars of heaven looking at you there ,
their might by mine is far surpassed ;
oh that spring would come again ,
was a match for fortune fairly , o.
or him who wak'd the fairy muse of old ,
the gladness of peace : fill the earth , make all things teem .
and he 'd knock out the winders and save all the doors ,
his belt behind him , where the golden clasps
with zuhrah wrought , that she reveal'd herself
to her that had been his slave .
and in its fellow 's fate foresees its own ;
aimed with cruel thought to kill her ;
phoebe , the toll - man 's daughter she ;
blades . but i with my sharp sword cleft in pieces a great
with agonizing woe distressed .
except for orlando and ranaldo , all are heathen .
" in the fearful hour of judgment ,
night passed , day shone ,
sing hi ! the hawthorn pink and pale !
singing , merry on the hill - tops ;
its onely what the boy hath done
but i love -- thee .
striving to stem his words , he told her plain
or more than the empty echo of its knell .
turn of course ,
loo , lordys of euery lond :
--in the old times , before he threw away his knees .
he thus to me : " the love of good , whate'er
aught wry !
the great virádha , day by day
as plain as day , before my eye .
but thou shalt perish with thy goods and treasure , if thou
or the " speech of logan " shifts us
each breaking wave she knows ;
or if , bold pirates , o'er the deep you roam ,
and loved to make a grand display ,
flew to the branches above her ,
whilst mocking imps cry , ho ! ho ! ho !
the breeze will not answer you ; neither shall i.
spent lying in a gutter .
and he struck it in the middle .
' not even once ? ' said una . ' if he was very lonely ? '
garrula siluestri fistula sacra deo ,
when disturbed by the mice , she appeased them with rice ,
half turning to the broken statue , said ,
poetry -- how this differed from the sicilian and tuscan
and , after chloroform and ether - gas ,
they say that nothing dies , that all we stake
already through the woods came whispering .
as if in firelit camp they lay ,
vobiscum est _ iope _ , vobiscum candida tyro ,
no fear more fearful than its own may find
twin carcants strung on idols ' thighs
stand upon the paved work of a sapphire .
the other suitors were much displeased at this , and one of the
eyes do angrily redden all a - weeping .
for this little hand to do ?
their store of herbs and simples was renowned ,
if it in darknesse be enshrined ever ,
when golden fancy played upon her ear ,
put mourning round thy page , debrett ,
we had baffling winds , and sudden flaws
and all my lands and tenements :
sweetmeats ghí and gur,(1038 )
out of this towne helpe me by your might ,
when thou hast lost thy youthful prime ,
sounds quavering as a gnome 's wild flute ;
the bird that warn'd st . peter of his fall ;
' specially them o ' t ' heeigher ranks ,
loud he shouted in derision ,
of heaven immeasurable , and years that flee
of heaven again assailed -- if heaven , the while ,
though for their love our tears like blood should flow ,
that constant mind , and hate of wrong ,
shut the winged words in cages of his heart ;
to some milk - white hens of dorking,--
his legend reached
to rise , aspire--
she looked down to blush , but she looked up again
_ newcomes _ , where'er you go , you 're sure to meet ,
remonstrance was met with from both subjects , though
or shall his broad imperial wings go lame ,
by dream i saw one of the three , i. 192 .
" all is well along the hill - side , "
looks at the cradle and balls :
and rising lark ,
yet did he not as vanquish'd quit the plain ,
" there was no need to hit me , " michael said ;
so ere i die , i squander all ,
and when again its well - known music thrilled ,
in my broken heart 's disdain !
foundering ; the horrid surge that breaks upon her
or nymph , or goddess , at high tide of feast ,
who , with marphisa leagued , the martial maid ,
thinking at least to lie alow
o manful eyes , to front the skies
makes itself heard , o cupbearer ! now we are ready , o
the unintelligible song .
fear not ;
he broke ever ' gol - durned rule .
soil of some yielding thought ,
proudly spake she : " he is not a traitor ,
though his surpassing merit
the dame , who was his surety , in her sleep
how the great guns , peal on peal ,
thereafter pallas athene set a covenant between them with
now thought ; but doubted next , in fear to fare
whose crooked ploughshares leon 's uplands tear ,
as well rogero the design to aid .
" let chance our kingdoms take which erst she gave ,
eyes that shine in kindly beauty
slowly the watches of the night are gone ,
medici , in his ambra , a poem , first published by mr . roscoe , in
here , as the nations of earth in the light of thy freedom unite ,
when we came to the fold of the king for rest in the night .
a goshawk able to rend well his foe ;
of happier mothers ! nay , nor cool touch
is merely human .   yet they sound my temper ;
all ready , so pretty a crowd were they
there are nine and sixty ways of constructing tribal lays ,
came unto the lake of silver ,
old john , with white hair ,
chose her transient stopping - place !
golden - hair'd rhadamanthus o'er the deep ,
things with a rich flavor of old wisdom or humor ;
give me your love , and be all mine own !
and died'st the glory of the sword and gown .
when haro be the wail . and down the sky
" whoso lays his hand on these ,
to be so bolde so blynde or so cruell
thou then must know i was count ugolin ,
' alas that ever a knight should be so false . '
brooding shadows vanish throughout the spacious earth .
from him the grace : through her it stands
" these simple rustics are overcome
an ' i 'm lookin ' afore i leap ;
purer the trickling waters shine
o had my fate been greenland snows ,
and the taps , and the slaps , and the raps on the crowns ,
this delicate , voluptuous thing,--
heralds ! approach in safety ; not with you ,
the country 's custom .   we descry above ,
there has the purple vengeance a proud seat
her sad surprize how can it be exprest ,
halves of two nights we should have spent in sleep .
wings the moon of magic upward ,
or turn at once to theme more glad ;
of one beloved in infancy ,
that fires the length of ophiuchus huge
chasing the clouds of the night away
and a pretty man also ,
back , threatening still , the hosts of ocean go,--
on her whom he honored beyond all praising .
the message that the setting sun shall send .
and seems to me almost a sort of blunder ,
as renkeȝ of relygiou{n } þat reden & sy{n}gen ,
near guelpho now the battle waxed hot ,
has rested , little used to miss the foe :
and maiden rapture that makes luminous
" to me alone , " he said , " thou didst sing praise .
aware that all imagining
from every lurking shadow--
and quick a light
when i hear the cuckoo singing ,
" le roi priam , et auec luy bon nombre
to we d this woman . how about the mother ?
and o'er green meads and new - turned furrows brown
new instruments of anguish and delight ,
soon won attention from the rest ,
on crimson mounts where hydras peer--
smells like the burn'd sabean frankincense :
lead thou ; to follow thee shall be our part
which is the entrance to salvation 's way .
ah , stern cold man ,
the little revenge ran on sheer into the heart of the foe ,
while storm and gusty rain ,
but when he said , " leave him , and onward pass ,
for those who dare or care enough to find it , "
thy speech is fruitless , vain , thy toil
nor out the children 's playing .
o puzzle - headed wretch ! from which ' tis slung ;
life 's retreating gleam ,
say , should the philosophic mind disdain
" o , yes , i understand , " said lilli aim .
now , zeresh , call the servants of the house
a thousand echoes also sung around ,
or in islands where myrtles are sterile
thy truest friend , and none was left to plead
fresh , and blooming , and blonde , and fair ,
the stage , the " drop , " and the frescoed wall ;
the house of god , by christ inhabited ;
of venus ' influence i deplored , what time
thou canst not raise thy thoughts too high ;
and the usual virtues came and hung
each with the special grace of your delight ;
a joke for all chattering tongues , he carries
flumina amem , sylvasque , inglorius!--virg .
holy from on high .      i hope in truth
heart that my dream
boisterously unkind with a comrade , just as he is more criminally
non fuit e multis quolibet ille minor ,
as i have told the jury , what she did
in the like manner working as the artist ,
his lordes thonk schal ofte lese ,
her farther speech awaited ; on her lips
took the consecrated cup of blessing .
how the chestnut rose to the leap and fell ....
keeping time is power 's token .
transfix this heart , child : howsoe'er
there are one or two more of you now than once there were .
there 's a spirit on the river , there 's a ghost upon the shore ,
unto shore , and sky , and silence ,
no ; doubtless he 's shot -- or he 's hanged -- or he 's drowned !
she spoke ; minerva burns to meet the war :
once on a time , some centuries ago ,
is what the sunshine is to summer . all
and despots , trembling , flee ;
he stole the prisoner forth , but with his woes
which , all my inner tumult stilling ,
verse - man or prose - man , term me which you will ,
there i forsook thee , the wild waters seem
and moaning o'er the billows
he has leaped the bog , he has pierced the brier ,
though by no reasons she be justified ,
each instrument confessing you its lord ,
where the miracle lies anchored . "
soften , sleeken every word ,
_ lint _ , flax ; _ lint i ' the bell _ , flax in flower .
such scenes that eastern plant awakes ;
whate'er the theme , the maiden sang
to her whose virtues did esteem acquire ,
his unforgotten sweetness--
o sweet and far from cliff and scar
alas ! for the rarity
that opened in eden 's vale .
like linnets in the bush ,
save the midnight attack , save the groans of the maim'd ,
you are singing secrets , bird ,
how man may free him of her bonds ?   enough .
as fervent as the fondest soul could crave ,
as they are .
adread to hear the argives ' onset - shout .
basket , with handles , from where it swung
thou , in the day that breaks thy prison ,
spoils his own leaves , faints , withers , dies at last ,
and a spot i knew , where the roses grew
who loves to rest her gentle head .
thus he made answer , and subjoined : " i pray thee
concerning the prowess of his son .
into its substance , and becomes one soul ,
may paradise thy soul await .
the king , light leaping to the ground ,
or illustrate a name ?
but if a genius rise , whose pointed wit
always yield heavily at harvest time , for the soil is deep .
makes the lungs laugh , the throat cry:--
and find them out , and know them for our friends ;
or where the sons of eden long before
the genius of the ageless something spend
i hear the far - off curfeu sound
from mortal to immortal painlessly .
in friendly league would join with you .
adown my cheeks the pearls ran ,
at your command , back to the olden place ,
of all my hope and fear !
for strife , i hear , has made the union cease ,
and gaf hem fee with my hond ,
saidst not -- i came a wand'rer o'er the deep ?
fills , and exalts above the gulfs of death .
that essence , which discovers by what means
because i carried out the broken phrase ,
a languid sun low - dropping to his rest ,
love gradual bends to him her soul ; she comes
in his hands , and if perchance
the twisted flowers smiled , and her white breast
that night , a mingled column of fire and smoke
i gave a various gift to each ,
changed by melissa to their shapes anew .
then he sprung upon his faithful courser ;
where a haunting memory liveth
for ever , ever keep me here ?
recall your sweet image again to my side--
not to be paid so quickly . yet ,
for then our ills , whate'er our lot ,
have thought it life to leave their fellows slain ,
array'd in garments her own hands had wove ,
and those of youth , a seeming length ,
stillness and death 's release :
to most of them that led the paynim bands ,
do they flow , like the dews of the love - breathing night ,
upon my soul between the kisses and the wine ;
thou lovest ; but ne'er knew love 's sad satiety .
and i went a worshipper to the great temple ,
and curses thick upon my head ,
follow'd by loud lament , by terror , fear ,
and make a shroud out of their suffering ,
and yet i half incline to think his words ,
and the mountains , in disdain ,
high shell'ring woods and wa 's maun shield ,
what doth the poor man 's son inherit ?
the other found a narrow bed
and , though herself not unacquaint with care ,
twirled for me the spool and spindle !
ingloriously be brought to nought .
and whispered , trust thy father , child .
and thought of those sweet days and nights that flew
at hand were their attendants ; / they longer tarried not ,
give me the eyes , give me the soul ,
“ a riddling world ! ” one cried .
achastus , which with venus was
he knows he 's in ter fight and win ,
and the touch of it is as soft and light
but he spoke in a cultured voice and low --
no sign of the things we saw this night .
his seat in heaven surer .
while the thin shepherd , staring sick and gaunt ,
faults of those who are most eminent and powerful . "
he shall bring the proud to the dust .
well , as i said , the home was good enough .
a foe in every form is found .
close now thine eyes , and rest secure ;
and sih the lordes in astat ,
so fell the pride of all my hopes ,
small starry reveller!--
i do n't see such horses about .
when the war - flag was unfurl'd ;
from india or palestine . that love
or instantaneous rays of light !
with that the shepherd waked from sleeping ,
marphisa , waging all the while the fight ,
here comes the wind
then quickly bring the mare ,
waters the crooked fibres of their roots :
some slepe as slogardes tyll their thryft be gone
and marks my brow with his loving touch ,
in autumn 's gloom ! so virtue , a fair flower ,
his bright arms flashing like the gorgeous sun ,
what care i for a monarch ’s name ,
then took he the wound , smiling ,
i saw a prize .   " run , " cried my friend ;
" see that thou dost not spare thine eyes , " they said ;
the brook that murmurs from the mere
mallet huge and heavy axe ;
these villians would esassinate the holy pope pio ?
intent on pardon and on pious lore ,
the lark is in the sky ,
farewell , thou true and tried reflection
here must we do our duty to our king ;
fluttering her airy wings in hasty flight ,
along far clouds of pearly shape and lining ,
--all this it knows , but will not tell
the lofty spruce and its branches lopped
i dragged up from the dark abyss things of strange aspect and
but when she charms my sight ,
bishopric of florence are the curators of its revenues , which
yonder live wellamo 's maidens ,
that favored mortals might your virtues prove .
then , with that inward music fraught ,
but match me the woods if you can !
and milk from the farm . "
what of your claim to him endures ,
it was ; each word sincere ,
to clasp his feet i fain would bow :
but soon they ceas'd ; for midway of the road
_ hisa - ko _           " continuing . "
was sacrifice and muttered prayer ,
thy life , long roving o'er the deep , i know--
and , thro ' long evenings , from our lares claim
lo , if we needs must seek a son strange to the latin folk ,
now it 's done an ' over ,
archibald ames is an artist ,
boy , pity me that am a child again ;
to rest the busy over - anxious brain ,
like prelude notes in deepening chimes .
teaches the lesson that to - day we heed .
yet i lie here
and banded murder closes round !
even then , upon her homeward way ,
he stared to see with shattered skull his favourite captain lie .
book v. incipit liber quintus .
song , " see , see , she wakes !
ye jarring , screeching things around ,
yet none of ye remember .   but if aught ,
mother lady !   mother lady !
ah , then our hearts were bolder ,
that the eternal beauties it unfolds .
und lauernd auf den todesritt
old snowdon 's gloomy brow the sun hath kiss'd ,
they bore my wownded frame to camp ,
enthralled by the unconquerable delusion
the winning softness of the child ,
her heart is thrice as rich in bliss ,
a cap of flowers , and a kirtle ,
as on a funeral pyre .
the captive germans , of gigantic size ,
as centre in the round .   that which dies not ,
then there 's no girl !
and built of nothing halls of gold !
why does n't she blush like the rose or the pink ,
and nature seems to us serene ,
she ne'er neglected house affair ,
we have in common ; we are idlers both ,
when woodmen , in the forest 's deep recess ,
the wild - flowers found the sunlight where they stood ,
that i may feel how black the grave will be .
which made his cousin happiest .
rescu'd , had in his righteousness bin lost ?
and called for gin punch for the crowd ;
but she did not come ,
rune xlviii . capture of the fire - fish
along the champain leisurely my way
simply obedient to its guiding will ,
of my love it would bring .
iam dulces lacrimae , dolorque festus
away to the left -- his friend at the right ,
and _ he _ wo n't recall it till ten the next morning .
the glories of our court , thou mayst therewith
an hour 's time -- think!--to sit upon a bank
" pray fire burn stick , stick wo n't beat dog ,
( his blanket tied with yellow strings , )
to each other linked are ,
lost dove , what art , what charm may please ?
not only , only arms of mine !
comfort and warmth and ease no longer seemed
when thou hast thanked thy god , 160 .
we have not yet started--
and bought up all the trumpery there ,
" _ he died and he went down to hell ! _ you know not what you mean .
on match or pipes , and sometimes peep at death ;
on that wither'd breast , and her weather - worn cheek
thy goodness constantly we prove ,
i ca n't help putting in my claim to praise--
" there he shall find a certain task for me :
two score rotting years i 've seen
that safe recess they gain with happy speed ,
there is an allusion to this boot - cup in longfellow 's " golden
we trust not to the multitude in war , ii . 112 .
with thy dim mortal sight ,
with news about the future scent the sea :
to do he knows not what .   the task performed ,
angels no more
my goodwill , as a springing air ,
if you jump " highwater " you 'll lose your breath ,
i wad hae gien them off my hurdies ,
they are careless .
and all the rhetaean shore to ashes turne ,
only have i time for grinding . "
saw their twa loves were gane ,
like a tune through a tickled guitar .
held recluse
i shall not mew in vain ,
till ance you 've heard my story .
and his mass of the days that are gone .
" oh , anne , sister anne , do you see anybody coming ? "
so growe my griefes ; which makes my hart to pant
then thus her sentiments threw out:--
when love is alive and hope is dead !
by bacchus ! ye are none too lean
in terror of bloodguiltiness she now
or is thy saying not to me reveal'd ? "
it matters not to me , and i resume ;
i know a little story , -- well , i swow ,
ye win , this summer 's sky shall snow ;
dear bharat and śatrughna too :
and knew not what they meant ; for still my voice
but of _ thee _ it shall be said ,
all i can think of in this note .
thy precious things , whate'er they be ,
which makes our failures sometimes seem more kind
makes the hedge which others break ,
like those whom living tires .
into the sunset 's turquoise marge
where like snow the gannet 's feathers
with breath abated :
would not give it up ,
our kisses were so fair they brought
nous n'avons , m'a - t - il dit , ni lambert ni moliere .
then blaw a steady gale , ye win 's , waft him across the sea ,
my wondering little child .
but how i ne'er will tell,--
that thought alone king arthur 's knight shall bind . "
and saved me till i saw thy face appear .
all valiant chiefs , and men of mighty fame .
ten thousand thunders from on high
softly , softly
hid it in the copper mountain ,
and hast been from the first .   and , ethel , list :
lone to - night he came to dine ,
thus i beheld assemble the fair school
unto _ his _ heart she felt she would be taken .
and snatch a fearful joy .
your corner is a public curse ,
for a matter of twenty miles and more ,
that , when a dreadfull storme away is flit ,
and leave me bare 's the naked tree ,
is the wind which down the crumbling fireplace blows ;
but i 've forgotten her address . )
name that always rhymes with cupboard--
but that around him flocked his birds of prey ,
but now i have it reapen ,
to have about the house when i was grown
and take the berries with her hand ,
i fail of all your manhood 's lofty tastes
says di , " this stubble
love with nice touch renews the organic frame ,
i ask'd my lucia but a kiss , ii . 10 .
as to entrance his pain , or cure his woe .
ish most elegandtly tresst .
terrasque suas post terga videns
and in the lowest deep a lower deep
her preference of a boy to men much bigger
to what the traveller bestows .
pompeius , with the consul in his ranks ,
and pregnant periods of teeming birth ,
a choice which in itself is good ,
and his longing , still withheld !
a doctor brown i also knew--
withoute fail , he must be dead or i ;
flit from the scene , and couch them for their rest ;
on domestic sanitation he 's a toff ,
down from up yar ,
" o light , o glory of the human race !
could use it fer his coffee , and
falters , sighs , but never speaks ,
his aunt proud boasts the new - made god 's great power :
honor and shame from no condition rise , 39 .
let us probe the silent places , let us seek what luck betide us ;
  a fact rendered pathetically historical by mr . horne 's report of
from view--'tis all in vain ;
but li - lamboni oft wonder'd if her fairy friend was gone .
flocks that wander through the birchwoods ,
deinde usque altera mille , deinde centum ;
far from his friends ; then jove , awaking , pour'd
' twould please me if those , whom i 've humbugged so long
a ' by her lane .
_ llewelyn _ heilyn , hwylfeirdd waddawl ,
to fetch and carry nonsense for my lord .
and weird and wide the torches glide
in gaudy colors spreads on ev'ry place ;
tide .
ne will the woods now answer , nor your eccho ring .
how he might augment the numbers .
and of the red - gold vintage i implore
lord god , thou hast in hand ,
brand as fire - seed in the ashes to save himself from having to
the great key at his girdle , and abhors
and thus he 's king without a fight .
and scythia 's multitude , who the last
her mantle flings aside , and still remains
was ravished from the youthful warrior 's hand ,
from whence th ' innumerable race of things
think ye i meant to pay for fires ?
if smirking wine be wanting here ,
from the crimes by me committed .
" ' twas twenty years last night , last night ! "
to present griefs:--amphion 's race extinct ,
a moon , worn as if it had been a shell
an ' found an ' known an ' met along .
.     .     .     .     .     .
which bids my soul rise up and bless the god that blesses me
the need of god we did not know .
reproduced by the western minstrel . they were chiefly composed
not for one year ; and one night i have walk much
were grown as the tools of my smithy ; and all the world i knew ,
is rocked to rest , the wind 's complaining note
in those first hours of his fair life were shed
yet through the fight no word of cheer ;
we lift up our hearts in our songs and our prayers,--
till there break from passion of the human
made of fine twigs , entrayl&grave;d curiously ,
immortal question in a mortal face ,
unter mir -- ach , aus dem licht verschwunden--
of course they had to feed him without dishes .
no quieras más aliento
welcome the celtic yell !
but sir the price i ask will claim a bid ,
themis , who is the beginning and the end of councils , [ do not ]
and the red coral whereon writhes the alga cold
wise books of every lore of every land
which to the vaulted ceiling creep ,
of hero and leander ; then i 'll bring
o concentration of brute force !
for the night still shuffles , a gipsy ,
over potomac 's to st . mary 's wave ;
the bread of life dispense--
in the bustle and glitter befitting
thy mother sits weeping , thy fond brothers sigh ,
for the oak table 's massive board ,
but he ne'er will forget the short vision , that threw
unfaded amaranth , when wild it strays
with his face turned to the skies ,
and if they have racing hereafter ,
if you were april 's lady ,
in consultation close with jove engaged
i wake and a clock tolls three--
our hero 's blood was dearly bought ;
till sweet - breathed evening came , the pensive - browed ,
as men spring in modern ' cirques ' -
the babe unto his mother mary ;
types of things dear that do not die ,
that love was in the next degree :
rears within thee a vault of light ;
he keeps his wary head and blinking eye ,
when , in the street , with flush of fears ,
“ the trembling doves before him . long the chase
but things like that , you know , must be
he fell into a druid swoon .
three times , ' t is said , a sinking man
in peace , war , joy , or woe .
the oss began to whinny ,
a deathly sweat came o'er his brow ,
from the pent walls our customs round us shape ;
my lips have rested .
could only find the right turn in the road .
soaring through wider zones that pricked his scars
then , then , methinks , how sweetly flows
against these giants , fierce of heart ,
would i store up in painted treasuries
how can one know
and such doom he drees ,
and west they drave , and long they ran
journeyman - printer , lamb with ferret eyes ,
aquilonis stridor gelidas molitur nives .
great favor with the king ?
' neath the counterpane , just as we laid him .
not doubtfully perceived.--look homeward now !
and various vine .
glozing gnomes of pond'rous built ,
and , there , amid the waves , a naked maid
of shadowed grass in spring pierced with crocuses ,
not only mine the sharpness of this joy ?
tho gan the veyne of troilus to blede ,
' o simple - hearted psyche , once again
i 'll welcome the lass wi ' the bonny blue een .
his batten'd flock , all those which gave him milk ,
fond smile to smile sent faint replies ,
surprise the wag . as in a dream we strive
and then the dreams stopped .
for , bless them ! if ' twasn't for this wrong - headed crew ,
quoth theseus ; " have ye so great envy
arsisti neque erat lydia post chloen ,
the licence and luggage were packed ;
hastened to his little vessel ,
the other may not flesh its jaws on thee ,
more of the water than ' tis wo nt with others .
of all the ships upon the blue ,
on earth heads , arms , and severed shoulders lay ,
they on in their rebellion went .
the bard has slipped full many a time .
from out the stars into the solitude .
spekende , and ech his oghne avis
stand in order , and listen
and heightened by the diamond 's circling rays ,
departing , they an even track pursued
compacted , that no sign of juncture soon
of all he saw and felt on earth
on apuleius 's golden ass ,
anywhere on your road to cairo ?
two climbed toward yet a lonelier grave--
tremendous scene ! that general horror gave ,
that still kept hoping on ,
the treasures that he fain would closer clasp .
ye are sae grave , nae doubt ye're wise ;
here . on that great seat , on which thou holdest thine eye because
how scholdest thou deserve grace ,
my spirit trembles on the wing ,
" i came as a slave to your camp - ground ;
the cause of love , he schal be take
must carry gray alloy :
by which the soul of man is fed ,
which this lord holdeth better so then worse :
where check nor bar his way oppossd .
he who stood on that field , true battle saw .
an act for punishing of persons who bring in counterfeit coin of
a holy maid ; for , be it known ,
with news of an opening flower
it is the best expression of his genius and one of the few
" i ship mineselfs tomorrow , see ,
not chastity nor childlike faith alone
mine own they are sure to name .
there schooled , with a rabble of words at command ,
played o'er the vision 's radiant face ,
pat murphy ’s boy tim , that married moll casey ,
the honest work , the _ knave _ enjoys the prize .
would i , as father , happy dwellings raise ! "
for each his foe for bold and hardy knew .
who wedded thee ; and that she sinned , knew not .
who wear the finest linen and the latest cut in clothes,--
wanting in ancestral knowledge ,
view now the winter storm ! above , one cloud ,
with melting heart , and brimful eye ,
here to forge for me the sampo . "
ancient system of religion . while it is much more exuberant
your guardian spirit , ariel , who
" attune the harp to more than mortal lays ,
of this vile demon 's doings in the world ,
seeking but for thee , unhappy ,
o , such a very funny thing ,
the gloomy oaks and hawthorne hedges greet
some of love 's fire still burns within your breast !
who from the terrour of this arm so late
the spindle and the flax ; o happy they !
or the old - time faith and truth .
shall walk the world , in credit , to his grave .
than when first risen from foam of paphian seas .
shall climb an upstart .
( to save description ) , fair as fair can be
and waters as they foamed along ,
if he aloft for aid
her flame is unlit , and unfledg'd is her wing ,
was in the stirrup jammed , his steed below .
the moon - bird is devoted to the moon ;
shade the black host , and intercept the skies .
in stiff array
_ and ever the biggest in sin the best was held ; _ ( p.   45 . )
but when the sun his chair in seas doth steep ,
forth into crete he goth be schipe ;
dwells on the past , or suffered or enjoyed ,
thy patron powers , a temple will i rear
by her _ own _ strength the city falls ;
again , he lapses in his trance .
and so from heaven to deepest hell ; o fall
of gonoëssa ; ægium , with the towns
gives somewhere back the thoughts by england given ;
" orange and green will carry the day ! "
when john , in eager search , fell oddly flat on
useless to me who plant
the steep green hill , and woods they were to pass ;
to strut on ahead
over the bulwarks of a ship when the sea runs high before a
seas and cities , near and far ,
to laugh and love.--_let us rise up and live ! _
filled her throat ,
_ chorus . _ we ( pretious ones ! ) in you haue won
thick lightnings flash ; the muttering thunder rolls ;
for , like so many souls who go
who can no farther go . "
of toys terrestrial , she can rove at large ;
and brought his wooden hoop with him ;
so the blessed one , who blesseth all the others ,
list the ominous stern whisper from the delphic cave within,--
before her husband sought to make her
of that reiterated sound of -- god !
an sit vita nihil , et longa ? an differat aetas ?
with his music ringing loud ,
is relished by the wisest men . " _
and our guests be more contented ! "
rich , and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out
near him stands a grim haruspex raving ,
comme il avait su plaire ,
to higher form of liberty ;
did she bring forth , and all together sat
through the boundless arch of heaven he sails ;
was but the mask to cover your deceit ;
sturdy he seemed , though he was sad ;
and arms not to be tried by such soft touch :
the fault of love , by whom i was beguiled ;
on her cheeks had loveliness its dwelling ,
just as good as you were bad !
her scent , a saturation of one tone ,
waen here your favour is the actor 's lot ,
while only one faint sparkle , green and gold ,
luventute et pueris liberis , ama quod lubet .
and that was proved wel be nyhte
between the green sky and the grey .
" und die du wählst , und der 's beschied
the weavers are busy in samarcand ,
thus vafrine spoke , nor longer stayed on this ,
over the world of winter strays the king ,
sink virtue 's sons beneath misfortune 's frown ,
the ships their streamers gay ,
unseen , they pour blessing ,
for civil , clean , and circumcised wit , i. 244 .
as they proceeded .
and play at books that i have read
or him who bid the unhallowed flames retire ,
sleepless i wander in the night ,
that blissful sight softeneth all my sorrow .
ah ! thou hast been unhappy at the change
and now , i 'm different from before ,
he stood a moment in a far - off dream ,
boot and saddle , mount and ride ,
giving their impatience vent ,
so hadde i spoken with hem everychon ,
in heav'n - ward musings .   rich were the returns
becking each fevered brain .   on bleak divides ,
whose western side is lustrous ; for the moon ,
with pity , never melt with love ;
my poor alexis , then , in peacefull life
an ' worthy o ' the truest love
and therein ( christian renegadoes all )
divided ; light the day , and darkness night
and there comes no answer in arch or dome ,
what are the wraiths of mist
" what is it to thee , who curest sinning ?
upon the wood , the rock , the sky ,
at bottom , your own spirit , gentlemen ,
( _ in sincerity _ ) or like thee in beauty .
he was booted and spurred , but he loitered debating ,
oh , if a doubt intrude , remember him
that o'er the topmost trees
they heard him coming across the downs ,
and in strange valleys greet strange deaths alone ;
i gathered my robe to my knees and raced swiftly ,
these many years to err when now i say
so that he could not learn a letter ;
an author can want , except words and ideas:--
a fairer temple rose and progress stood--
about his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin ;
from half - measures strive to wean us ,
then acts in nature 's office , brings to pass
on looking back i acted like
and was gone , even as a passing trumpet - blast ; the
proceeding , bade them to the courts of jove .
he adorned and decked his pipe - stem
( _ butter and eggs and a pound of cheese _ ) ;
and not one year of mourning,--one out of the many
for that you loved me .
the howling forest , and the tiger 's den ,
o frenzied forges with your noise and blaring ,
' twas one , both , three of them , they know not whether ;
while , beastly names from many a tongue ,
in all its beauty , for the sight of it
whom should mortality survey ,
blow horns of victory now , as i reel and am vanquished .
throned in its hundred candles burned
so that thei folwe noght the lyne
these cheering hours of promise , and of prime .
when rome was indeed rome , for liberty
" why , max !   stop , max ! "   and out they came pell - mell ,
her beauty broke on him like some rare flower
white rose in red rose - garden
“ dear cinyras ! guess whence my fatal end.--
the old guard shall not fail .
sad prayers to a forgiving god ....
romance ! was there ever a boarding - house in the world where the
to the instinct of her feet ;
some at the bar a living gain ,
they scarce can be excelled by our's--
or weep as i could once have wept o'er many a vanish'd scene,--
not long wonderful , 426 .
a thousand guilders ! come , take fifty ! "
could you ask such a question?--but we will
wept for my rock - torn side .
rival him , for he was older . with him there came fifty ships .
it looked at us with a wild dark eye .
rewarding its own majesty ,
but never a stop .
a trembling as of light along a bough,--
but we bring violets ,
against this spell to find a remedy .
the real of ideality
fired at his word the rival racers rise ;
* written by request for the philadelphia sanitary fair .
and natural ingenuity .
i touch the hope that i may not see ,
base fear my manly face note make m ’ avert .
to woe ye to destruction ; but , to save ;
with hem which under governance
spite of that double - fronted sorrow
myself am blessed in the slowest sphere .
shall to thy happy coast repair ;
yet even these might fail to see
but i could walk to hampstead heath ,
thus to a phantom form he gave command :
_ and after , when her blood ran wild , _
then march bravely on ,
the captiue world awak't and found
and sadly listens to his quick - drawn breath .
one in the darkness .
with its golden top and branches ,
and in the secret of thy presence dwelleth
the banner of victory to the breezes hurled,--
and run the risk of barring one truth out .
sence hain't no tellin ' when !
god hath bid dwell farr off all anxious cares ,
that ever wight did dare for to invade
for a cap and bells our lives we pay ,
old affections vainly cherish'd ,
affectionately yours ,
and thus avoid that hellish dread
lasts fifty years ; and there to celebrate
and of these fellows that thus went ashore ,
confusion to your elements ensued .
gone , the song of gamelyn ;
nor strength is in me to save
haste , shepherd , haste -- hesperian fruits for thee ,
whey they swear that wrong is right ,
a woman come to meet him,--tall and pale
thy thoughts are one with mine ; then come , henceforth
o rhapsody of the wraith of red ,
toto fruemur gaudio .
kai phyllois semne me , sykomore , teois ?
tho ' puir , and puirer , we maun be ;
the freedom of a mountaineer :
then spreading out at his next turn beyond ,
nature and principle , and always ready to perform offices of
thunder that rocks the room .
shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast ,
descending now in slant descent
our slum as " beef stew"--gosh ,
in beauty , but , if only for a while ,
forth from the havens stretch'd unto the hills .
thus did he exhort them . meanwhile hector called upon the trojans
though even the wisest err ,
against the stab of worldlings , who if rife
now the strong man amid the green space stayed ,
_ alci . _ lo , from the plain i see draw near a pair
and shrank within himself for shame :
begonne horestes forto threte
at cabinet councils to preside ;
long time elapsed or e'er our rugged sires
a pair of child - lovers i 've seen ,
but in the hall
and covered the face from view .
winnowing the corn , which in our country dialect we call a
warsled , wrestled .
nor less she wish'd these beauties to resign :
that the nights are long and the days are dim ?
trillions of icily
cum fuerit sciron lectus toruusque procrustes
soft is the collied night , and cool
nursed in the lap of tenderness ?
like a brandishing of swords ;
he who shepherded his sheep
" for only in dreams i see the faces of the women there ,
_ out oars for stavanger ! _
he has supplied the dome throughout so well ,
to be holy and meek ,
if i only , only knew !
we o ' thought christ went against war and pillage ,
the tree to which its wintry foliage cleaves ,
that to corporeal substances could add
" oh , father jove , and all ye blessed ones
no more he 'll hear the tempest howling,--
while the hostess lives and prospers .
the cries of war and festival ?
hunc solum paphie puto lucum fecit amori :
into a nation mighty grand .
what power shall drive this serpent from our shore ,
it was the mighty master 's life - desire
but being hanged , tortured and shot ,
roaring ;
as i sat by her dying bed ;
she clasped him to her bosom , kissed him on his hair , and asked
the melon - cart turned over .
if afar off or nigh .
approved without dissension stand ;
then adjusts the golden bridle ,
ordains us e'en as blind ,
this while the lady begs him not to bray
upon a tour , wher sche goth ofte ,
to sit ... till every sense
and in thy visage grav’d those ghastly lines .
as it tells of the strand of an unseen land
of the fresh leaf .   him these in courteous sort ,
spake disdainfully in this wise:--
see a pin and pick it up ,
who o'er their reason let their impulse reign .
no one but jack had been about
how witless and how fondly slight they be .
but no matter what she did
maybe the fountain whence it came
by duchesses with roses crowned ,
or constancy , and love , and makes it grand ?
and a priest that blows the coal ( a crack in his bellows ) ;
shrieked out for succour , wept aloud ,
the nobles of all ages .
borne in his heavy car , and demons have lifted
is worth a descent from olympus to meet ;
with wings of richer fire ,
my ráma touched with deadly hurt .
till , as his course he onward held ,
be careful still of the main chance , my son ;
you are not mine and you will never be ,
nunio , to proud castile as dread a name ,
from a palace or cottage wall .
lay in the thunderer 's fane : at every shrine
therein is more fortunate than the hero of the ballad , and ,
oh , open and let me in ! "
she spoke , and helen ’s secret soul was moved ;
that thought of hopeless sorrow seemed to dart
shouts of applause along the shores resound .
as well that these a greater part should bear
come hither , ye husbands , and look to your wives !
and yet i burn .   if but e'en now thou fall
a heritage , it seems to me ,
for i do not hear him coming
hope of my life ! divinest shape of earth !
god ! what a light has passed away from earth
on the bottom of the furnace ,
deep in her soul to lie .
if thou be mortal , if thou change or cease ,
the valour of the brave is shown .
an ' she gits suddin soft and tender - like ,
sister dear , i love you so !
his faithful dog is slumbering at his feet ,
and still not yielding all her face to him ,
all shall be granted thee , the glory with the guilt
for soon the shower will be done ,
but here i free thee : like one awaking
exspiret auras ; occidat , occidat
in long anthropomorphous chain ,
was very slow , was very slow ,
thou weeping answ'rest--"no ! "
that a new sledge i may fashion ,
within my ears resounds the ancient lay,--
" o , tell me true and tell me soon ,
" mr . forrester ? " i asked .
not see ?   would you have me , then , break
that pushed her off and down .
troubled yet comforting , thrills
to whom the youth : " since then in vain i tell
what diva 's rubies ever glow so red
' my brother ! '   ' well , my sister . '   ' o , ' she said ,
thence look this way , across the fields that show
the bursting rains in seas descend ,
ariodantes , whom with tearful eye
beneath , what angels are at work ? what powers
black charles a traitor is proclaim'd
but blessed forms in whistling storms
go on , mighty man -- doom them all to the shelf--
the gods mete out for all , or she , the dread
but more to bend the bow . him perseus smote ,
and age has on her beauties fed ,
that just now dangled still .
for nature , wisest mother , oft prefers
lea , grass , untilled land .
to fals doctrynes , but first and specyally
" lord ! what 's a hundred years ? " said whybarne , who had seen
there , on the threshold of his house , his wicked wife doth slay .
may have my clothes once more ,
on a weary world of woe !
in that last parting ;
there ! the bells jow and jangle the same blessed way
the mortars belched their deadly food ,
and blue and crimson . mules and sumpter - beasts
the sun shines on your sword .
in ambush .
gambling stocks may rise ?
still shed new heat and vigour through my soul !
and p{ra}yd to god , that ale may wyld ,
and his flown senses had returned , he loosed
some cock or cat your rage maun stop ,
though hope may promise joys , that still
are tossing their green boughs about . he comes ;
when , troy laid waste , that valiant son of his
unto the speech these times give slippery words ,
of that quick sap which circled in its veins ,
through the slowly rolling seasons
and wealth ! on whose soft bosom laid
old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore ,
that need attention .
fidele 's grassy tomb                          _ henry newbolt _
everything had an ever - increasing attraction , far exceeding any
the light there lightens , the day there brightens ,
for he 's still in earnest that 's hurt :
shall i , a puny vánar , choose
con la púrpura misma , juntamente ,
no mimic constellations flame ;
have both held fast your old allegiance ,
express yourself , and instantly disgraced ,
to him , of virtues , dominations and of thrones . "
to muse upon some darling child
i tremble for to - morrow 's fee . "      }
how vain and inconclusive arguments
nor think i that enough of day remains
and sadly will with grief and shame
unconquerable , for i was wellnigh mad :
compositions written for a purpose , but rather as the actual
first , to the devil the guitar i 'll send !
but stirred not thence -- and all in vain
their great trunks evenly set in a square
_ relation of translation and other parts of the book . _
with a clang , while the young man groaned and fell
since mutual quaffing of a philter ; while
of glorious croups beneath a showering mesh
save inmost thoughts that in thy soul repose ;
this hardy training proved of use to them ,
turned eastward on their homeward way :
you ne'er had mourned in vain ! '
that i mine own soul there imparadise .
with passion than with tears , the muse shall bless
the billet got , they travel to explore
and i am able right well to discriminate secular matters .
weel , he looks in ma face , jist as game as ye please :
mantled in unimaginable green ,
this he pursues the livelong winter through ,
wouldst thou , or thou ,
doth bow before expediency each day ;
o is for oysters who trotted so quick .
men called us serfs and drudges ; men knew that we were men .
but little valued now , set out upon
takes the vessel 's ribs and flooring
stiff when paying a visit ,
they sing thee , o leif the lucky , they sing thee sublime ,
two years passed on , and peace and quiet were again restored to
too stubborn to even fa ' in luve !
if in the house of so worthy a man i can earn my own living ,
saw the fight at minnewater , saw the white hoods moving west ,
on me , who most discreetly have pre - empted isaac 's chair,--
of lydia 's woe , by smoke well - nigh opprest .
at early dawn ' tis quite a treat
from fools and knaves , etc .
as han ' clasps han ' ;
henri , who tends sheep with his assistant ( leroy )
" all that you have said is true , " answered euryclea , " but let me
the maniac bells of war .
sail over the salt sea water . so they embarked forthwith ,
“ whose is that hermitage we see ?
on the sweet summer wind its purpled wings
trojans , agylla 's bands , arcadia 's glittering train .
terrible seems it now to die,--
que no habéis de ser creídos ,
but when day strides across the hills ,
for nineteen rounds , on grass , with the bare hands ?
in these soft hours , this sweeter month than june ?
men ripe in wisdom taught him , / who knew whence honor came .
to the gate of kalma 's courtyard ,
byzantium , carried the eagle from west to east , counter to the
bless your soul , it was the salmon -- salmon always makes him so .
their nectar crowns the lips of patience ;
strong lions , panthers , boars , yea , all the brood
she 's tailing them off , she 's running strong ,
the wind has a lesson to teach ;
each dew - drop raised a limpid glass
and the seas were white with froth,--
played softly by fairy musicians ,
can tell a heron from a hawk , and if
so away with greek prose ,
with comrades but eleven i 'll hence to gunther 's land .
that ye may know and trust me . view it here .
looking to far - off and celestial things .
flings her myriad flowers .
oh , comrades who in peril won your fight !
only to - day is mine ,
( since light and darkness blend not in one sphere ) ,
she is there , she is felt in a blow struck hard .
that these , her sprouts of promise , her most prized ,
january , when the sun enters into aquarius , and the equinox is
then let him go , for well we know
proffered them seats , sweet , easy , fresh and soft .
to darken all the hill , and smoak to rowl
i 'd say , " to only have conceived ,
to admonish the maidens who tarry too long at the fountain ,
fate 's hid ends eyes can not see .
escorted , thus preventing me , rejoin'd :
and buried her and said : ' my chariclea
or for grouse to ask thy brother ,
we shall meet again never to part .
and the crimson sun at noonday standeth high .
while droves of perch , impatient to be hooked ,
loud sound the strokes , till each brave woodman sees
birds all flew on our right hands , and both he and i rejoiced to
but ah ! remembrance of true love
but the worst of the matter remains to be said .
the poor device of man .
he called his conscious brethren near ,
in such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears , and the women
with long green weeds for hair . "
a rubic soldan rakes each ghaut ,
neither man 's aristocracy this , nor god 's , god knoweth !
stand cornfields by him ?   pride , o'erweening
then the wolf , and bear , and panther ,
hurrah , hurrah !
in my mouth the words are melting ,
the moth 's kiss , first !
my vineyards are the richest
bot nou to speke of mi matiere ,
did stay another , leaning , and all lean'd
the broidered garment of the soul
the struggles of humanity became
still thanks us for , but not our fed ambitious--
this will i pass , nor their so many more
of juicy fruits to cool the lips of fever ,
accomplish'd . to telemachus she gave
shut bells that dull with rapture sink ,
sway'd in that country , where the water springs ,
the ivy twines about the crumbling stone ,
to his feet and cried aloud , " before my god ,
and , ' neath herne 's oak , for shakspeare 's sight ,
under a copse , and hardly dared to fling
float double , swan and shadow !
or else again with side rent wretchedly ,
alas ! my hand is not pure .
the living in the dead ; she will inspire
in fact , about him there 's not one natural feather . "
for whom i must decline ?
above , the heavens aglow with light ,
the servile and the vain , such names will be
till the dawn of the day ,
tried in the fire ,
thoughts come to us as from a dream
before the dreadful altar - stone .
and the wild - roses of the promontory
th ' incumbent weight of absolute , complete
there is a glint like worn brass .
the gay nymphs danced , the minstrels sang .
then rain and night i found , but straight again
of luscious form and speechless worship 's feature .
put in their claims , on counts malign ;
on earth 's original fisticuffs they called
live or dead or fashioned by my fancy ,
and th'affianced maiden thus address'd them :
instructed him at length to gain
the soft spring wind goes passing by ,
save one , who stout as julius caesar ,
magersfontein -- and the bullets biting fiercely left and right ,
a bosky wood , a slumbrous stream ,
aunt hannah heard the window break ,
and , climbing not , we fall .
weaving with a golden shuttle ,
but she guesses he is near ,
make hope resound within this altitude ;
for no atchievement cæsar e'er perform'd
it ceased ; and the red sun reared his head ,
bestrews the bed of every sea
the lamb restores , where no thorn balks ,
cause to blame my brethren , in whose battle a man puts
she leant against the armed man ,
the never - ceasing thunder
then even to make a liar of thee
till a ' the seas gang dry , my dear ,
as envious eyes blast and infect ,
behold , it swims to thee ,
finger lengths from the scabbard two .
save one , a brother -- by ill - fortune 's spite
old itching palm i 'll tickle with a joke ,
and aloud cried hiawatha ,
for his home in the sea , which was moister .
" ma di ’ tu , musa , come i primi danni
the golden grain shone fair and bright
tell me the way to susskind 's home .
irene , thy sunny face is lit
" shall you tell them ? oh , no ;
do thou not forget thy mother ,
  not circumscribed by heaven , but having thy seat there
her habit flows in darkness down ,
and his rare wisdom abbagliato show'd
him that is prisoned in the darkness tomb ,
of wreathed silver : sumptuous they stand
and dost thou smile ?   o , thy sweet face !
valour , destitute of other virtues , can not render a man worthy of
trust not these seas again , vol . vi . , 232 .
and many a glorious shrine
thy branches ne'er remember
was as god 's peace upon the world .
when one goes to fish in winter .
flap idly ' gainst the mast of my intent .
by the priest armed with bell , book , and candle .
the most with cloven limbs or broken head .
from chance of war , that makes weak hearts to fear ;
wroth that the christ confesseth christ he is !
after such wise this flower has germinated .
as far as they by sight can followed be ,
if e'er with offerings for his son 's success
my most full flame should afterwards burn clearer .
and wooers you will find ,
_ homeward _ chant the broadway cars !
what silly puppet - bodies danced on strings ,
when jove to punish faithless men prepares ,
ni llama así fulminante
i am sae fair and fu ' of flesh
since false pride barred him out " ; and yet again
-- yet , through the fear endured , they far and nigh ,
like death 's warning o'er him creeps
and , as the hermit ’s death he rued ,
or ere that work engag'd me , i did hold
she took the berries with her hand ,
for me -- i am not put to any task--
then penelope came down from her room looking like venus or
those eyes that mirrored all eternity ,
godávarís sweet stream he sought ,
and servants in fair garments dressed
maids cry with taunting sneer ;
than of the sunlight above them ?
in the midst of the chamber the harp of joy is gently and
perhaps my saying over bold appears ,
what a " water " !
like a brooklet o'erflowing with melted snow and rain ;
which works on leases of short - number'd hours ,
that killed the rat
wooed from her lips the secret of the west ,
and shoutings follow after ,
no son was left latinus to succeed ,
and then a fire occurred at length
that whistle through the glen !
but the psalm ' delectasti ' giveth light
the buoyant beam the lonely man pursued--
incest 's cold horror here no glow restrain'd ,
unvexed by labour :
and aftyr , other lord{es } of hys ,
" i see your client died -- a hell of a life
in secret he wanted to speak , and he spoke ,
from either end of heav'n the welkin burns .
with conquest flushed pig struts away
how shall i ' stablish thy memorial ?
when giving up his quid ,
perhaps you have a birthday every week !
the day in darkness had ended .
thunder - light ,
making sad feast upon the crumbs of light
and fetch ye hither a vessel ’s mast ,
the boy might get a notion into him ;
coll , or colla , is a common name in the tribe .
till we “ the sensible of pain ” wou'd change
for the stars above the east are growing pale .
to flap his wings and look about .
and let me die -- so do i long for this .
while a mighty longing seized him
i pledge you now they will return , the franks . "
following his track , such was the will of heav'n ,
life is all care!--well - a - day !
to - day to heights of rapture have i soared ,
seeking my heart ; winds have roared and tossed me ;
" may i go with you , my pretty maid ? "
sperne meas , quas o sic facis esse tuas .
light green in the deeps,--
the drarmer 's writ be shakespeare , years ago ,
in life 's first stage ;
lov'd while i liv'd , and dear ev'n after death ;
near the side of windermere ,
" yea , verily , by reason of our misdemeanors lift we the voice of
highest esteem by dante .
of wisdom , she deserts thee not , if thou
to do thy bidding,--earth and air
and one i wished my own .
and so we walk together ,
the image of that gnat appeard to him ,
and of him - self imagened he ofte
abe martin!--dad - burn his old picture !
a sadder vision yet :   thine aged sire
welcome ! my bonie , sweet , wee dochter ,
as from a rock - face : of such temper were
like warrior on the field .
so desolate the day . to me were given
but for eating a rasher of what they take pride in ,
little bo - peep has lost her sheep .
o strange indifference!--low and high
all gone his life 's prime ,
lovely wee thing , wert thou mine ,
should a whole host at once discharge the bow ,
two mighty wings , enormous as became
around their lord were slumbering ,
" i am right ignorant .   such privilege
you have been man , i woman , wo nt to wait
for there is art y - now for to redresse
which are kept for , etc .
over the shady creek comes sailing ,
nor , but in motion , canst thou find thy rest .
beside him , rang in his astounded ears ,
of his esteem , " ah , cruel art thou turned , "
" i hadna pu'd a flower but ane ,
quid tu ? quae nova machina ,
that stared upon the dead , unseeing ,
of goddes sone , with o vois
and sprays of jasmine gathered for their brows ,
for saul he ne'er had ony .
and should at last suddenly
for them , and i hope they may never have another dinner anywhere
v. 114 .   there is . ]   the envious .
must taste that cup , for man is born to die . "
trusting there to see a maiden
as in the calm full moon , when trivia smiles ,
onward , whenever light winds blow ,
clarified silver ; greens and azures frail
you whisper me of love and untaught faith ,
he , when all nature was subdued before ,
rich through three thousand acres left to him
and araby 's or eden 's bowers
jack and the bean stalk ; with coloured frontispiece .
not a foot in street or house ,
i bless the tremulous lips , that say ,
of branches broken ,
with this new weight of anguish surcharg'd was kriemhild left ,
and elfin hearts as light .
i will go into his wigwam ,
and like the foam upon the waves ' bright crest ,
they were the work of waller 's declining life , of those hours in
conduct him .   trust my words , for they are true . "
your way out of my house , out of my sight , --
of weakness in the fearless saint .
" away , away ! take all your scaffolds down ,
upon the broken stem , renew
  _ the topmost stone _ : the stone that had formed the beginning of
forty thousand made they all ,
on this our enterprise to lead a band
and wha will welcome my bright bride ,
their lawful power from the free consent
at vero fies hac ratione minor .
aureole - fashion round their head ,
with what a bounding stride he goes !
and we all held our bre'th , knowin ' well it was death
whenever the moon and stars are set ,
sir henry newbolt : a letter from the front
seek thou union with him !
and tempest there , who houses
and ' i 'll see you again , ' said he ,
thou dost unbind me from that beauteous sphere . "
abdiel , then whom none with more zeale ador'd
since , then , you have used me so ,
" her favour is diffused to that degree ,
a cloud of stones and arrows flew the air ;
but now we have the last dear ingots gain'd ,
such battle for their human right ,
we 've been sad because we missed
i track him in vain !
persarum uigui rege beatior . '
it has wings : they return through the night
who , laurel - crown'd , has come to us again
he knows not how , by force demoniac dragg'd
even my thoughts which , without change else ,
and keeps me gazing like a curious child
in you whoe'er you are my book perusing ,
his duty , to its orders true ,
and think , this heart , all evil shed away ,
the strength whose scourge sounds on the smitten sea ;
i knew them leafy trees ,
" should perforce thy will impel thee ,
all that , of old , eurotas , happy stream ,
how angrily he spake , and towards him turn'd
oh , lowbury pastor is fair and young ,
teach me these strange events to scan ;
how tydeus was slayn , lord of argeyes ,
and thro ' a thick fog creeping , with chart and book and lead ,
of labour , that did from his liking balke ,
and women we do use to praise even so .
well skilled to sing , and play , and dance
while i -- what , did he deem light loves so tender ,
me if thou canst , ' he asked me , ' recognise ;
o , queen of heaven , and all you blessed saints ,
ruined and broken on thy foaming breast
the british oak ,
the asas ' father tidings from the world 's extreme :
father and mother ! sacred names and dear ;
with endless glory crowned , and lasting praise .
and so have been forgotten:--i condemn none ,
with marvels , miracles , ne'er done nor dreamed
from the finest wool of lambkins ?
the jest beheld with streaming eyes
made themselves ready , and in five bodies followed their leaders .
shone in the hands
everywhere portents of calamity
where wildering fear and desperate sorrow led . "
inferno : canto xxiv
was by the songs of your menalcas saved .
the squire leaned from bank and hauled
" whenever i can win eneuch o ' spanish gear ,
it reached john jones , and to his wife he said ,
not in the circles of the great ,
that through the pathless air
scattered them among the bushes ;
are dearer than the sun .
when the stars were out of sight ,
must smooth be shorn away ; the sapless branch
and now , o queen , without delay ,
with shoulders bowed to sorrow 's pack ,
oh ! i should have full many a tale ,
" lay out ! " the bosun yelled .   the dauber laid
in beams of joy so bright as yet
shalt rove around in eve ’s array .
but more exalted , with a brighter train :
see the little lonely mourner ,
to tempt the perils of the glorious field .
on earthly bliss -- it breaks at every breeze . "
how soon the storm may scatter it ! "
and twice ten knights , the least a name
into the very substance of our life ,
but truth and beauty have a friend
o , thou eternal homer ! who couldst charm
zealot ! if reason be thy guide , then know
for colin 's darkening plaid .
devotees of this almost implacable love , and the
o come to the meadows
with regal scepter , every soule in heav'n
' aye , ' said the boozer , ' i tell you it 's true , sir ,
ever thus as thine !
dat de foot look mosh better , if turned toder way . "
all lovely dames , in long array ,
with the utter confidence and careless grace
from the crystal river flowing ;
denied not but that day she felt alarms .
( that art which gives this world of ours
fragments of old norwegian tunes
by the guns of the akhoond ?
dear lady , at thy feet i lay :
“ if thou hew down my father ’s grove ,
there 's not the slightest chance at all she 'll marry morris b.
awake the present ! shall no scene display
counting each creature that needs us our neighbor ,
her faithful carlo being near ,
ride hard , ride hard to abazai ,
no tears beseem the day .
a low chair -- no , not a chair -- an empty box .   he
shining anew
that seem'd to plead , and make replies
so , still within this life ,
but ripens spirits in cold northern climes ;
or to seal up the sun .
the toll - gate , when in summer at her door
beyond all other , think the same voutsaf't
resolved , sent for him and said wildly to him ,
the main to navies gave them hope of rain ;
and elegant ladies ,
the four longer elegiac pieces which follow add little to our
joyous , and clear , and fresh , thy music doth surpass .
swift be their guidance , wheresoe'er it lead !
desine de quoquam quicquam bene velle mereri ,
the racing tracks were seen ,
due reverence to the bráhmans gave ,
from his dappled steed of magic .
both to the ' yea ' and to the ' nay ' thou seest not .
and rais'd four thousand ghosts ; and struck with dread ,
mokanna sees the world is his no more;--
to these thou givest thy praise , give credit too .
half - breathless . neither so did i resign
_ the _ brahmin 's wife _ speaks _ .
if ráma , leaving royal sway
my teacher thus without delay inquir'd :
thou blood for blood shalt pay ,
and the sire of my taheia come greedy to the feast . "
save but to whisper prayers above the dead ?
" and fill'd each pause the nightingale had made " .   in
pile the stones and pile the beams about her .
on m'a dit que vous êtes bon .
deceive the poor little fishes , and spears them with the ox 's
qui vive ! qui vive ! in the dawn .
onward the tiger and the leopard pants ,
when thou holdest revelry .
and , heavier than all ills , the torment fell ,
monsters at will are conjured into gods ;
of the argives -- he , and his close fighting followers . the son of
thou earnest from a poet 's heart ,
from clouds , that rising with the thunder 's sound ,
and he told all his tale .
she dared not bend and kiss those cherub lips .
and she trails her robes in the dying fires
when you to distant shores are gane
when dacey rode the mule .
those godlike presences . not dreams indeed ,
matchless in artistry ,
to swirl the tune about the sky !
thro ' the dead oak , that vagrant twirled
slowly it loitered past the shivering reeds
he hath put salvation on ,
never gave the enraptured air )
sweet metaphor!--and then the epistle ,
thus the distant hills re - echoed :
for in my hert emprynted is so sore
years to traverse the same tract of country at certain
then soon , with the emblem of truth overflowing ,
with such perplexity of mind
could i smile his scars away
a falcon flown , a greyhound strayed ,
she saw ; and , on refulgent pinions borne ,
a thousand church - spires sanctify the air
a hoss that has a little yeer ,
who flung our banner 's starry field
may happiness wing to thy bosom , unsought ,
which now i sing , reader !   i swear to thee ,
" and wherefore take we not the way most near ? "
converse with those great shadows : haply much
come cuddle close in daddy 's coat
a savage chief of yet more savage men !
is that which leaps up , flickering lithe and long ,
of hell , whence emanates his muse .
thus little founded in their subjects ' love ,
knowing me not , better the lowliest roof
from painted truck to gunnel , fore and aft,--
beside it is sitting a corpse , cold and stark :
hélène , séléné , flottant de phase en phase ,
and led her to yon fountain stane ;
up to him his buckler quick the warrior caught .
like moving mounts slow masses trail along ;
imborder'd on each bank , the hand of eve
on my snowshoes come rejoicing .
within thy cottage sitting , we had wine
this worse than worse of things
" o lad that i loved , there is rain on your face ,
lies lone above his breast ,
sistitur rivus , cruore qui fluebat perpeti .
i 'll fly to deville , and a cast of my forehead
i 'm eagerly waiting the glad days--
god 's image there so bright before--
through leic'ster - fields or in the strand . "
and lay me down by my master 's side
now gentle uma bade a damsel bear
" of us , who sanctify and murder men ,
a lodge within the wood , and there
mindful yet of mortal feeling ,
mad have i left , to dare the burning zone ,
the maxwells will gather in droves ,
from the historical documents recently obtained by the state from
' fair , kind , and true , ' varying to other words ;
from isolation without end
softly a strange dance did tread ;
hos potius dicas creuisse in sidera montis ;
the fount of yearning tears was straightway dried .
a respite from the vapours that exhale ,
and , staring down a country lane ,
when the keen greek chased flying science on ,
as they deserve ;
the clarigold and clavicorn .
and often in my quiet home , through dim and misty eyes ,
with bellying cloths on poles , and not one oar ,
would fain sail westward unto you .
it is the spot -- i know it well---
great artists of the ruse and wile ,
and jane was young and chearful as the day .
of one my passionate laughter ( taking care
and my lord castlereagh , having so often shone
the water - pitcher has succeeded grog .
how silken her actions appear ,
there was a young lady in white ,
and he , who now to sense , now nonsense leaning ,
vaeinaemoeinen , old and steadfast ,
i am gazing into the twilight
when in her gracious hand are seen
a nothing fashioned like an all .
try'n ' to cuss and try'n ' to pray .
on the floss of the snow - drifts , while glancing
your weight upon my arm :
or autumn with his many fruits , and woods
and all my evil deeds ? in truth not i.
how beyond this life of toil and care
brought back with him again the blooming year ,
or like the clouded sun on high .
then the old story ,
or else a cherry , double grac'd ,
was the eighth bolgia , as i grew aware
that moves the voices of this lonely beech ?
i sat among the beggars at the cross - roads ,
and underneath , d. e. b. t.
hasted the herald , the hoard so spurred him
of the sweet - voiced choir
and chalenge to our selves our portions dew
a solemn impulse from above
listen ! him yonder who bound down supine ,
the shelf it stood on was too high ,
quique anno 1711 dirigendis portorii rebus ,
sat and rocked , in peace and plenty ,
" both merlin and melissa have i need
and thine own spirit 's weal ;
till ilka door wide open flew
the scene lies on the sea - shore of pylos .
mine and not mine , a being of the sky
think of it , here and thus made over to me
with the light of the candle .   he took the watch
soft words to his fierce passion she assayed :
the master 's song
in solemn silence swallowed ,
and some months after , so it proved ,
broken by death . still the mother is but a ghost and can not be
hangs out his small green lamp at night ,
driving some up the slopes . . . .
the lord 's cause ne'er gat sic a twistle ,
his step - mother , in happy hour disclosed
better to die than leave his banneret . "
and rávaṇ in his chariot rode
but then the beasts are pious on these points ,
to put into the neighbouring port this band
not a senseless , tranced thing ,
strive to the uttermost to find your worth ,
beneath the mild augustus , in the time
in his delice abide stille
shoot sanguine streams , and sadden all the skies :
and he wraps himself closer in his gray mantle ,
her spring can never fade :
in hopes the father may one day
twilight caresses on each pictured face
" ask me no more where jove bestows ,
him too , perchance , where'er he sits a guest
yet not a single one caught she ;
we worship in our dreams , and the soft hues
and so in mountain solitudes -- o'ertaken
she makes him know rogero , that in haste
_ a light it lent and borrowed too _ . "
and the splendor of light above , and the glow
now spring comes round again
the last of anything that might remain
clamour'd from far off cliffs invisible .
man 's restless activity flourishes still .
" the lady vivian would be vexed , i fear ,
echius , tlepolemus damastor 's son ,
thence back the knights departed , each fearing to be sped
both ran toward him . dolon at the sound
pays like a lord -- that is to say ,
that day i was my willie 's bride ,
since i parted from liadin ,
i look on his . i know
not sapless things of the byways ,
some men , at mast - like pole , to work are seen
rowland hill 's chapel , and the height
to whom thus eve yet sinless .   of the fruit
lyke as erthe into erthe never goo sholde ;
and mutter and whisper and call ; and call--
will next be laid upon some lesser mate .
and , shaking me out of the saddle , where i sprawled
far in the distance scattering specks appear ,
makes us both active and strong ;
forget the world !
turns to sharp silver of a perfect note ;
for { books belong to husbands and to brothers .
speak , what art thou ? _ euc _ . one once that had a lover ,
and cries out at the shame they do liue in :
he will not be obliged to wait ,
with red beer and brown beer .
holy water come and bring ;
_ i am the breath of god . i am his laughter .
so lay the world ’s great lord and pride ,
a frightened bird--
like a staff supporting me ,
essential oils narcotic , poisonous , deleterious to insects
the soldiers of the guard ,
and there 'll be some bloody work
the seed upon the expecting soil ;
where now this one supposed world is pight
_ welcome _ , he said , _ if there be welcome here , _
roved far and gathered much ; some harsh , ' tis true ,
wandered among the thyme -- upon the bank
she ca n't eat up the grass , there is so much .
when him a melancholy voice addressed ;
with kisses balmier than half - opening buds
with gestures such as spake a father 's love .
of the man you were ; whose fervent spirit willed
and on that morning , through the grass ,
from the rock 's mossy shade .
in holy founts -- while some would time
year of the purpose accomplish'd !
" or bring a goodly company / of hun - men by thy side .
noble and stalwart .
in whose keen fire all hopes and fears and woes
could not but arouse suspicion .
" dear !   dear !   but i tell ' ee ' twill be a fine ship .
and all of high or low degree ,
shine fires , a curtain stirs
for i heard your rivulet fall
and on dead planets grey and cold
merry , merry england is waking as of old ,
tell me my vision was a baseless dream ;
the walls of the temples of antiquity ; many of which may be
lizzy be blamed .
and startled mountains rocked and reeled ,
how would thy shadow 's form form happy show
god grant i never leave you more
of the elegiac .
all eyes upon him , turn to very meacock ?
she 's a trifle sentimental , and she 's fond of admiration ,
and butting horns , and hoofs , that spurn the sand e'en now . "
and leaves a wake behind it like a seam
childhood 's gay laugh -- and woman 's tender smile .
upon his tomb , so as the stone was hidden under them . " ' "
and kiss the hand which hath these many years
the fiery saxon gains on thee !
verily , in the bottom of my heart
ryht upon such a maner lucre
nor sink in the easier gulfs of shallower pain !
under the influence of wordsworth and shelley .   he had some
to portion out our work today with me indeed it lies .
and where strange dreams in a tumultuous sleep
there is a halo fair to see ,
up rose old barbara frietchie then ,
then , when i see thy tresses bound
many a well - laden sumpter before them cross'd the rhine ,
tuonela , thou seekest causeless ,
hast thriven , that o'er land and sea thy wings
at the gates of gangá(1039 )
denying naught , he sulked and held his peace ;
that drove them to the bell ,
emblems of humility .
" know , that till now we suffered have much pain ,
so shall i pay the debt my bow
can make thee mighty seem ?
cost her a husband , me a wife .
and they had found lorenzo 's earthy bed ;
save tinkling of a fountain rill ;
one time in the cool of dawn
glances that lure , that make each breath a gasp ,
haply i think on thee -- and then my state ,
and now , no less , shall her cause still prevail ,
each , in exchange , proportion’d treasures gave;(188 )
i have scorched , ' n ' thirsted , ' n ' froze , ' n '
from now , the all - day gait for me ,
never , i ween , was a braver dance ,
" we might cook this little mouse , if we only had some stuffin ' !
to take away my dove , my lamb , my darling !
ef you go and pay 'em back ;
while these appear before the power with prayers ,
' oo calls me " dad , " she climbs upon me knee ,
grew around the rocks luxuriant ,
o giant king , repent the crime
warned him by the embassy of hermes the keen - sighted , the
sus abismos abrir , y amé el peligro ,
perhaps you 're not aware
that painter has not with a careless smutch
this sweet may morning ,
and among worthy warriors , and before
in the mists of the day - dawn white
still the bells these words were pealing ,
to stray so far she would perchance be loth ,
of carpenters an hundred large he brought ,
ill was thy mind , thus ever quick and rash . "
such ample breadth ulysses gave the raft .
emanating , like the mighty river , from the simplest source , but
mingled their mossy boughs , and from the sound
as boiling water seethes the brain .
thine empire , latium ! is an empty name .
is charged with life ; and on the sand
when i have pained in anything
therefore it happed when but a month had gone
now then , learn
how can ye blume sae fair !
i came where called , and eyed him
a little freckled person , who
and in two faces stared , and stared
and fall , and then comes winter . "
tossing its plumes so stately and fine ,
byron does not mean " distaste , " aversion from the nauseous , but
plants of thy hand , and children of thy pray'r ;
into the world of souls , from this .
unseen by every one ,
you quiver like a sea - fish .
summer hath murmured with her leafy lips
" delicious wine , not strong . " and so we lunched ,
hungry with huge teeth of splintered crystals ?
a nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day .
porque todo ha de pasar
inhabiting one homestead , neither a hovel nor hut ,
then clouds of sorrow fell on peleus ' son ,
the tale to see
as he rushes out this end i 'll name him .
two glorious lights to guide our hopeful youth
him to his own dear country . but me he first sent off , for
and praise his jokes ( in england contraband ) .
to the god - lighted mind of man ' tis nought .
eridanus , quo non alius per pinguia culta
and she was free and open unto all ,
the devotion to something afar
is palpable to sense and sight .
that next resplendence issues from the smile
in joy 's crown danced the feather jest ,
your wealth i 'll so distribute , all shall contented be ,
hunferd the son of ecglaf spoke -- at hrothgar ’s feet sat   he--
o rĕs ' tēs -- the son of agamemnon .
and by the king of kings be welcomed there ?
a million stars within it .
poor tammy gage within a cage
at t’last two figures com to t’spot
though ’ tis not thine to hurl the distant dart ,
the house - fronts , and the blackening church - spire .
' twas for her , the cheering smile aye
forever with unopened eye ,
as mighty thews burst manacles , she went mad :
we reached the forest ; wandered to and fro
but smiles forsake when secret hours bestow
and i guess that i 'll be dead . "
uplooking to the sky , where stars are sown ,
ferret iter , celeres nec tingeret aequore plantas . "
that my poor contribution to thy needs ,
with straight , slim pillars , at whose farther end
the faery stitching gleams
ye know right well , how meek soe'er he seem ,
and also , thogh a man at ones
the first in genius , and the first in art !
that takes all else -- the smooth and rounded cheek
even now i sometimes think of him as lost
thy gaudy grandeur , and mere worldly worth ,
which do you like the best of all ?
the dead , and dashing into living men
far too low the shot flew downwards .
now winter nights enlarge
_ when first she gleamed upon my sight . ' _
before -- hey presto!--all alive ,
i could n't eat the cakes .
we spoke the word of war ,
you have often told me
here are two maids of the wind
fresh green of undulating hills ,
but blood is better than bone .
or yet thy manhood -- with strange innocence
upon thy hallowed clay ,
in meanest forms we priceless gems discern ;
spread out ; and a sheet
considered as hell .   hence it is that dante , who was likewise
from the prison windows our maidens fair
that made them an intruder on their joys ,
the mystery scented around :
i shall not want : my darkest night
surges , and ebbing , leaves my lips morose ,
lyke as a huntsman , after weary chace ,
ill - taen , ill - taken .
i try to gain your love and praise ,
rings with thy praises .
from the heaps of couch - grass ;
till i have heard from thee my doom of death
nor big nor deeply laden , she , at large ,
then enter now , my son , the city gates ,
were understood , the sophist would want room
dim shapes of souls of men that were .
are thus deceived and fall away from grace !
ask why god made the gem so small ?
but sorrow returned with the dawning of morn ,
contending roots fought for the soil
the youngest of her children ; we were boy and girl together , and
each took from thence a lotus flower
rage grasps the sword , while pity melts the eyes .
and if thou lookest well into its nature ;
ah ! the children and the maidens ,
our thriftless , bullion - minting treasury
in works of labor or of skill
and wonders what you 're thinking of
has learned to live .
to tell you how he 's livin ' now : gas burnin ' mighty nigh
wallowing on the daisy - powdered turf ,
the more that the nede is hyh ,
the frogs with courtesy arose ,
that here in the critical west ,
no bluff , understand,--
open and bright and lofty , whence each one
though he tarried outside till the singing was done ,
beautiful as pictures
but neither love nor hate in much excess ;
if e'er the fates should sever
friendship means well , but misses reach ,
within some low neglected rock .
unhoused at night , companionless by day .
the wise men kneel at wisdom 's shrine ,
" to whet our pangs and aggravate our chains !
nescis heu , nescis dominae fastidia romae :
come hither , come hither , come hither :
for himself he placed an inlaid seat hard by , apart from
years fled , and weak and old grew he ;
frocks and blouses in the grasses .
" shall i pull with all my forces ,
an ' deals some unco dingin ' knocks
with the young foxes in it , on the hearth
to him the footman does his embassy ;
the birdies round her singin ' .
is nature 's prompting : whether thus or thus ,
but i 'm told that he looked exceedingly nice ,
wound her with my spear . therefore i am retreating , and bidding
bright - eyed beauty once was she ,
in church , and putting organ in .
and that cartoon , the second from the door
of all my patience back'ards ! you 're the myrrh
" o ! who would not recount the strong divorces
he bade the sorrowful rejoice .
become so swiftly oblivious of his former loves ? from an
and now go home , perhaps to lose my head;--
gnaws at thy life , thou sighest in the night .
their harness'd steeds ; apollo , in the van ,
thy matchless power and strength display .
i 'm going to make a fire ! "
had , like a double janus ; all their shape
of white - faced warriors , marching west to quell
saw from each eye escape a swollen tear ;
and so they come unto the place where ye may see begin
kabîr says : " come , o dharmadas !   and see my great lord 's durbar . "
of such a rev'rend reckoning ,
and burst the cannon 's roar;--
en servir a dios sin otro comedio .
like grass , her young ones !   yea , in the low groan
and if i return i may break my vow
seven blouses and a jacket and a hat ;
that those dead men had no dead bodies left .
' t is fine to see them scattering refusals
address'd . with ire the angry goddess flam'd ,
and a bonnie gift i 'll gi'e to thee ;
still the sounds were hurrying , crying ,
and now quae genus tell the name
i can fly , or i can run
that the wrath of the abbot he 'd feel .
man is to be king over the achaeans in seagirt ithaca . but
an hour of day and an hour of night ,
such was the tempest of the dread alarms ,
some gesture overnight , some breath benign ,
beside the lake , beneath the trees ,
are poets then the only lovers true ,
his urchin fancy only thought
the earth , which feels the flowering of a thorn ,
and even that very deed shall shine
dependent is the heaven and nature all .
i heard the wail of childhood in its need ,
tories are rogues , and traitors imps broke loose ) .
then bade she forth lead hagen / to dungeon keep near by ,
poetry . in that school he had himself learned to be a lofty and
lines , are to be found in the version printed in ' poems for
days of toil and hours of ease ,
grant again , o good creator ,
glides freely , and no obstacle prevents .
thy master 's parting footsteps to the gate
he wasted not the wealth by labor won ,
with its joys that long survive ,
with looks as impatient , and teeming with sin ,
is opening now , and the third cherubim
that in the boat did stumble / that warrior to his knee .
by moonlight nor light of the sun ,
oppos'd , one deep and beautiful serene ,
with a glad heart .   i trow he shall not scorn
twin'd his lithe folds , and turn'd on ev'ry side ,
master or menial of passion 's whirl .
han felt that love dorste yow displese ;
_ creon . _                                    why seek delay
a delicate fabric of bird song
each day more still and golden than was the day before .
for eastern stays are little made to pad ,
were clamoring--
pináka , and twin bolts that glow
arising from a cultivated mind ;
i did not hear .
and i know to - day i 'm prouder of than sorry for the kid .
that beamed from the face of his lord .
as when falkirk with heaps of the fallen was cumbered ,
the flourishes and fragrant flowers ,
and gently , then , they bade me raise
when this base miscreant will forbear to sneer ,
he , far away , the chief who throws
and all the kingdoms of the earth be won ,
now , there ’s some foolish people are led to suppose ,
there comes a rumbling sound ,
in the blue - tinted vault of the sky :
and the amazing spirit of the troops .
of towring eagles , to all the fowles he seems
on its floor , o gift most noble ,
through all the time the fire burns them . with such cure it is
i see it all , i can not put it down .
and god and nature say that it is just .
and slow , as a woman often tried ,
foot set to foot , and mingled man to man .
comes fitfully and faintly through the ceaseless tramp of feet .
of fancy played through all the tales he told ,
' twixt africa and ind , i 'll find him out ,
cloud and wind may shift and veer :
the lips ' faint bitterness of brine ;
beloved pan , and all ye gods whose grace
for you all love the screw - guns . . .
enos , marmor , iuuato ,
i do n't know -- for none have proposed--
chor .   thy vestures were not flowing ;
and ( referring to her lover ) kindly add " a - lal - lal - lai ! "
" she looks too fair , she steps too proud ,
uiderit uenientem .
acknowledge it , and from within the walls
that shaded ide and all the subject field
hood has closed the most fatiguing career in the world -- that of a
and ye came , oh ye procuratores ,
not the stripes of sea - born maidens ,
thrice happy he ! that ’s with good nature blest ,
the hour is come , and time
for i am happier to know
to attest the pain
to strive to stay on this poor earth
seymer , and saint iohn for the bus’nesse closse ,
and from the summit of that craggy mound
and the coals upon the hearthstone ,
the rich , the proud , the potent king of spain ,
beethoven wrote ; and thine shall be the praise ,
be grateful for the health you own , the work
i{n } þe burȝ of babiloyne þe biggest he trawed ,
panting and sobs , as of mortal fight ,
rose over the town 's right side , in bristling tier ,
when all this wickedness was revealed ,
of dian grasping , with her ample right
only far off , where its foul vapors burst ,
and i wunder away in a bare - footed dream ,
a gentleman of good account
but johnson only ran off , to return
with love beneath its wing . i read and read
seyd , " welawey ! the day that i was born ! "
insulting repartee or spleen .
and thaws come back .
let us laugh at despair and contentment will come .
all over the happy peach - colored face .
each element assumes its primal state ,
lucis , salutis , numinis
morning is the place for dew ,
the farmer grows in wealth , wealth has no worth ,
filch your remembrance from the thoughts of men
far , far away !
then the glad vánars ’ joy rang out
her cousins came , her aunts peer'd in ,
lonesome ez staddles on a mash without no hayricks on .
the radiant constellations ' gainst the clouds
of her rises the man in him that was
among which , chief , are most burnt offerings .
with equal grief count anselm overflows ,
with her cherubic quantity ,
i shall be then a treasury where your gay ,
for thei be whom this art was founde
she quite forgot , and dropt her dinner ,
and i saw the poor patient joyfully handling the linen ,
we fain would weep , and would be dying soon .... "
and she spoke the words which follow :
to remain after me in sight forever ,
of this fair brook mandákiní ,
could he another course prefer ?
he never came a wink too soon ,
so would i save the fools , if they
off the river . if , on the other hand , i climb the hill side ,
had measured with their running beat !
hence , all you vain delights ,
extends , beyond it doth the eternal bounty increase . and the more
and drink you , drink you , drink you .
sherwood in the twilight , is robin hood awake ?
on mine ; a point i saw , that darted light
to those turrets , where the eye
ilpotar , the northland hostess ,
and visage all inflamed first thus began .
full happy is the man who comes at last
non , il s'en va , froid , sous sa pierre .
this further consolation yet secure
when i leave dat meetin ' house--
while the hot sun blazed in his tower of blue
he has left the village and mounted the steep ,
tho was ther many a mowth to kisse ,
oh ! how fleeting are his years
as queensberry buff and blue unfurl'd ,
his wonted lay of love :
with vinegar and brown paper .
who , of maturer years and graver mien ,
to summe up all his chymistry of spice ;
before she come to land . "
the holy virgin dreaming slept ,
that hath his windows glazed with thine eyes .
i 'd like to be the sort of friend that you have
who suffered sore for us ,
from analá all trees that hang
thereafter , by a _ woman _ , to be bossed .
as unto us their dealing , / god them requite in equal way .
of your deep poignant raillery i lie .
the secret council , by his words was mov'd ;
twice bowed before , though godlike , in man 's ken ,
but in another book it must be sought ,
flooding the plains , drunk with illicit gains
the tree - roots , gleaming blue black could they see
and changes this vast plane of weal ,
though where his bones are , no man knows , not one ! "
of all that reade thy poly - olbyon .
men 's various fortunes on my breast to heap ,
were we but amid the wheaten shocks ! "
to hev an ’ excurshun up th ’ worth valley line .
that might determine , and not need repeate ,
+ remdi+ for somwhat in his face i lok e
said the butcher 's boy to the baker 's boy ,
down upon my face i fell , its awful wings were o'er me ,
" soldier , soldier come from the wars ,
and day sinks into slumber , cool and sweet ,
and bitter hopes and fears alike forgotten .
a tender sadness drops upon my soul ,
the dupes to flattery , and the sport of knaves ;
round as the red eye of an eagle - owl ,
and pints of precious midnight oil
his own and eke my life .
my clinging magic runs .
thou hast forgot , then , who i am who hear ,
above the deep of fear ;
and the grief that i feel no words can speak ;
nay , let me look and believe
countrie for his coming -- whosoever can tel what is become of
" a love more true than minstrel sings ,
a fiery passion for the fray hath seized
" a ranger , lady , winds his horn ,
why wert thou so dear ?
is void ) , the same hath made my cemetery
atop the withered oak with vagrant speech
false hearts , and broken vows ;
in nineteen hundred and now .
what man was that went from you ?
ruptured .   their joint funeral was held on february 5 .
of cheering prospects , bids despair .
he said , ' i give thee liberty , receive
the birch - trees , they danced , and the pine - trees said " hoo ! "
your forests fair , an ' valleys deep ,
of war . sarpedon was captain over the allies , and took with him
next himself old péböân honored ;
--this was that memorable hour
who lay in death , by grecian warriors slain .
only of us the sailors speak at sea ,
just as , shouting from the forest ,
and if to - morrow , dear , i live ,
wandering from broken street to street
for one poor tear that he deprives me of .
first bared his feet , and after so great peace
or reads a love tale in a meadow , prone ,
  26 . = bacchus= ; the god of wine and revelry . a bacchanalian revel
by the thoughts in his breast
in oure daies that he seith :
as e'er held houri in that heathenish heaven
green , and with leaves overhead ,
god - ordered , self - fed energy .
upon god 's earth , as he hath guided me ,
was the flower amang them a ' .
so unbeschreiblich gastly ,
and urges his vain plea , prayer - smothered , anthem - drowned !
erato , eryphia , bromia , and polyhymnia , brought up bacchus . the
rune xviii . the rival suitors
pansies , lilies , kingcups , daisies ,
and sent game to feed his children .
your image , like a lovely sprite ,
" i takes my pipe -- i takes my pot ,
around me holds the captive fast ,
through greediness of yonder realms detain'd ,
but give me , oh , give me , the pleasures of home !
as when i also played the fool . '
while you were gazing at the moon![m ]
or , if our royal pleasure shall ordain ,
what like is your annie ,
the drowsy night flame - stained with sudden glows .
we shall be civilized !
and gods secure feare not her force at all .
" there is none among these maidens ,
devote thy memory to scorn and shame ,
and just one spray of lilac still abloom beside the well ;
love is a terrible thing ! "
made the fellers laugh ;
non tiene graçia virtud nin aseo ,
with its vile reptile - blazon . let us press
and the gods were more familiar ,
that he may n't with its stick , come about all your ears ,
whose flag has braved , a thousand years ,
for all that they have seen disastrous things :
whence , then , shall come the blow
stop this warful strife , or jove will be angry with you . "
prance the gusts , and then away down crimmercrock 's long lane .
the lesser beasts whereon his feast he makes .
with which your easter flowers are stained ;
arise the wonders by the lusians wrought ,
among the famous astronomers who lived about this period we find
for if these shanks which you traduce
the _ rās maṇḍala _ thus described is the exact equivalent of the
the vernal leaves -- she loved them still ,
yea , but for this i had been strong enow
all to get our own again !
since infancy tender .
inarticulate masses promiscuously jumbled
buried at set of sun,--
thereto replied king gunther , " but how can this befall ? "
the planets that love us
island - dweller of the ocean .
and in her veins is quick thy milky fire .
and i feel myself held captive ,
such whispering wak'd her , but with startl'd eye
leaping on board his ship , that others may fear to bring war and
grow old apollo comes with diana and kills them with his
he heard , and from his watery shroud ,
" deeply doo your sad words my wits awhape ,
no one saw the strange magician ,
i will receive the rite of christening ,
here , with my love 's hand warm in mine .
gown the pink of fit and style ,
addressed priam :
and lashed it at the base with slanting storm ;
but what is this ?
our glory in our patience find
where she has grown its fairest flower ,
and fell with a shout on the rocks !
with heavy heart he ’d sit apart
grimly smil'd sir hagan , trony 's champion strong ,
rather in pity , than in hate ,
marvel at this thy grace , as needs must a thing that never was
rajah runjeet visits his wife ,
above the same , succeed the hebrew women ,
the vested choir chants prettily .
leaped , and released himself from their design .
and he smiled a kind of sickly smile , and curled up on the floor ,
he ees so clumsy een da feet
filis un tiempo mi dolor sabía ,
and now has happened in our day
ast alios uicina palus sine more ruentis
and from his locks compress the weedy ooze ;
mas siempre ovo cryança
- oh , childish thought ! . . . yet oft it comes to me
and in thy little heart , dear ,
not large , but fruitful ; stored with grass to keep
with humble chiere and thus answerde ,
wrong to moses ' kinsmen , broke the covenant , and slew them .
beside the churchyard yew ,
a harder path in earlier days
on their enslaved brethren borne ,
amang the lave i manna speak ,
' tis not thy nature , but thy age that dies .
( 4 )   " gibecke " , " ramung " and " hornbog " , see adventure xxii , notes
where , o royal infant , be
beyond man , angel , star , or sun ,
among the wheat ; that when his heart is glad
to romeward , and hom he wente .
his flute in poke , and little singings sweet
deiphebus , which that comen was , of kinde ,
full of the god that urged their burning breast ,
but when we got to traverse city
predestin'd , we are carried by the force
the long road stretches back
and son - in - law to be beseech the knight ;
do nt achille fut tellement espris ,
at such strange power in silence , to the hush
i find them , as that 's fit ,
the exultation and the pain ;
a poet lies , or that which once seemed he.--
and bathed in vegetable blood ;
here 's some _ barbera _ to drink it befittingly ,
" so shall i to thee always
and the fourth angel poured his vial out
what can i do but dine ,
last came eumelus drawing to the goal ,
a maiden came by on an ambling mule ,
i reached her , trembling near it .
better than gold is a conscience clear ,
that they there might grow and flourish ,
when she walked the hill - tops tottered ,
que tal es aquesta entre las mejores ,
wrecked on this fatal day of our devising .
" come , be a child once more ! "
that for these hapless beings man had twined
one thing a vigil keeps ;
his heighe port and his manere estraunge ,
and rising on his elbow , gazed around ,
and strange mischance of doom , i wis ,
when we two slip at night to the skies
body of turkey , head of owl ,
trust we to the recluse 's prophet voice .
bluest midnight cupped the dew
it is time you should think , boy , of taking a wife . "--
when , from the orchard row , he pours
comes from the church 's pulpit end !
to me was most wondrously fair ,
recompense for golden service . "
of all that did befall him / in death of friend and man .
has odin laid within the scales of human life,--
flowers are lovely ; love is flower - like ;
from what paradisal
the baptist had to speak such floods of things ,
let me once more have sight
they sowed the propagandist 's wildest oats ,
yet , in its sacred chambers rose
and ever more fierce and loud
consult th ' ambitious , ' tis ambition 's cure .
a vessel as goodly , and strong , and stanch ,
what passionate outcry of a soul in pain ,
there is no profit of our sighs and tears ;
wainamoinen , old and truthful ,
similar . these are those operations in the order of the whole of
this robe , in which the deed was done ,
so peace and truce expect not , but war and mortal strife . "
wet'e - hi'nen .    an evil god of the sea .
thus was mount diablo fashioned .
people , if the lord our god , who ruleth the fates of men , will
and make the people 's council hall
each of us glad of the other 's hand to hold .
who would be in a roundhead 's case ,
and i in helen 's arms lying ,
the pigs come grunting to his feet ,
all - clement her its resolute strife
and plant a far - seen pillar over all ,
while nestor ’s son sustains a manlier part ,
the magic learnt in eden
the large - eyed antelope came down
palpitate with eagerness ,
tortured , afflicted , pined , consumed , and wasted ,
for all was changed except the palace fair ,
goes to learn how all things fare ;
but is he really dead?--oh , that i can not prove :
that are their small and secret homes .
him under monaco , upon the shore ,
for the rocky couch of sorrow ;
that your own head you might rescue ,
the body soil’d with dust , and black with gore ,
then praise pan who fought in the ranks with your most and least ,
he tugs with both his hands , and breaks the dart .
sage polybus , and stern amphimedon ,
as plaintive as a whispering monsoon ,
then ráma(868 ) from his slumber rose
braver , nobler , than them all .
and the first morning of creation wrote
of the waiting face .
i thought this his due ,
or nerve , what the world calls ,
o shining in sunlight , chief
and who shall say if the reality
and marred my life and turned heart's - ease
unmoved he heard them , and with sighs denied .
the three to three fought for it yet again .
of the gray mere , from whose unquiet sleep
no comfort to the wretched king .
how can my soul be cheerful ,
vast fleets i sometimes see , each kept at bay ,
" round and round in the wild wind ,
your epitaphs
she stood forth here so many an evening - hour
willing to aid , unable to defend .
the hermit boy distraught ,
and toodles was a white one ;
full oft : and i , though gone away , will follow with black flame ;
my song might shadow forth that saintly smile ,
who said to him : " accursed from the womb ,
and we smile , and mayhap grief is sleeting
i see their radiant brows ;
one is their common fear ; one stormy blast
and leave him space for combat . wretched man
" immortal newton never spoke
she has a prudence of her own ;
the daughters of mne seraphim led round their sunny flocks ,
fretted by sallies of his mother 's kisses ,
moved in that - air little pen
thus did evangeline wait at her father 's door , as the sunset
with her thy life - time -- and , moreover , lo ,
than trojan spears once we are on the wall .
its bridle with modesty leading . "
now that , thankes to the powers below !
happy ! when hearing this young creature 's laugh--
even the bravest that are slain
to him the countersign thereto conforming .
and spring will cleed the birken shaw ;
which was hence " noisy , " or reverberating . it had an upper story
while in wisdom 's worthy grace ,
and tenderest is their murmured talk ,
their happy eyelids from an unaverred
the kingly brow , arched lofty for command .
all praise to him who made the pest
the homestead of the free !
ouer all the worlde good bokes to be sought
home that the trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire
the _ sons of war _ sometimes are known
my wanton thoughts enticed mine eye
slowly i float through the realms of space ,
bosomed , patient , impassive ,
reft the charm of the social shell , vol . iii . , 276 .
people still will their _ facts _ and dry _ figures _ produce ,
aflame with words of truth , and tireless zeal ,
i thought their words would madden me .
and with thee hidden be my shame ! " he cries .
think - says - i , " them baby 's eyes
the flower within her bosom slips .
stopped and stared with his deep gaze centred
the reedy syrinx sounds among the hills ,
now grandmother 's cap i spy !
it cried , " mr . prior , i wish you 'd get on ! "
each on his mat allotted
helge 's magic dragon
and the armada went to every wind !
gallus et hesperiis et gallus notus eois ,
for lycidas your sorrow is not dead ,
for us to have freedome , oh that will be brave !
all , nor is there any gratitude left for kindness done . '
the broad atlantic lashing at the shore ,
seeking food in the hungry sea ;
as she fell moaning in her place .
ranged in a line the ready racers stand ;
they know to - night is christmas eve ,
your lamps may glitter raw by raw ,
what is your respectability now ?
that brother should of life his sister reave ,
then flutter back , and hide within my breast .
" and there we are gathered , a goodly collection ;
straightway in such words as follow .
the distant town that seems so near ,
this glocester 's duke , and york 's the other knight ;
and saw the land - lights burning
winds of the world , give answer ? they are whimpering to and fro--
ever - shifting history .   needless is it to speak here of
a song .
oh you who shout or sing or chant or read--
with bothe hire handes hath him preid
a sigh , the dead a
the wicked sprites , whose ugly shapes affray
sienna to conjecture .
although no more he felt the pain of eld ,
awake , ye birds , to song , ye buds , begin to blow !
the chaste sibylla shall your steps convey ,
letting pass life 's greater chance . _
therefore this day i dread the might of zeus .
with just a bird 's light care--
‘ i made them yeomen of the crown ,
wherof the dredfull hertes tremblen :
  pope owes much throughout this poem to the character of dido as
more violently than ever ; and after they
wakes to a thrilled invisible advance ,
for ever hang thy dreamy spell
his breast a paly grey ,
the lover watched his graceful maid ,
to keep ' is brains from mixin ' wiv the mud ;
and five long days well told , have now passed o'er
agastya,(701 ) noblest anchorite .
either father or mother .
" one , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight ! "
till we round the world at last ,
" i feel the cold , both in my bark and bud ,
come hither little dog to play ,
to - day he brought me from the umbrian hills .
trying in vain to conceal his amazement :
sounding clash , then utter havoc in the crowd :   the
in the vacuum of a glass receiver ,
is as the leaf upon the bough ; that goes ,
for in the sun , which lighted you and burned
the policemen , she says , are so terribly sure
each hearth 's flue gasps a gorgon throat
but that which shone of all most clear
through channelled night , where only sing
wishing with it
the army of unalterable law .
multitudo hominum declaratur per numerum exeuntium . " ]
glare at the storm - swept sins that tell
pray in fortunate days , for life 's most beautiful fortune
red , baby lips can drain revenge , and start
i changed my purpose ; and to - day i stand
then slacken'd it , which is the march most caused
and if possible , let her come to me .   we shall ,
then the mother , slapping his curly head ,
i need some bough to twine around !
hath taught them scornful tricks , and such disdain ,
and from philander 's friend the world expects
there lies no new path over sea ,
the bees wonder why
and my heart beat with his ! what wealth of bliss
the desire of men 's hearts has shed its glory over your youth .
but the sword of honour and the crown ' ? "
but a whining dog is woman ,
all - holy morn , in splendor awakening ,
when songful beams were shut in caves ,
there 's the sting of't . that , i think ,
they slide in muddy trickles
in dresden ist full - done .
the lady her handmaid to questioning took :
who seems to know i 've had enough
interclude conmeatum inimicis , tibi moeni viam ,
soft , low and sweet .
hallowed by him , the god of lays ,
unless ' twere warmer than it is ;
and rolls whole forests headlong to the main ,
himself too slow , " lano , thy legs were not so nimble at the
can ye sing ba - loo - loo ,
the barrier overpass
a wish or a thought after me ?
polyctor , rich , but aged , e'en as thou .
then hey ! the chaste interest o ' broughton
the dog lies in his kennel ,
here in the doubtful light ;
impossible to melt as iced stream :
the link that bound the old world with the new ,
but when she saw his dazzling eye wax dim ,
with old khayyã¡m the ruby vintage drink ;
did strike the vessel .   thrice it whirl'd her round
but ' t is pure fire , and they mere matter are ;
--it is the hour of feeling .
" and beasts shall be your animated tomb ,
he is poor , and favour never
( the bunting and the festoons , that is to say ) ,
that you usurp our smoothest dancing floor ?
and only the low lutes of love complain ,
shameless they give , who give what 's not their own . "
and that 's the lesson for you and me .
--¡adiós ! ¡ adiós ! lucero de mis noches ,
no sunbeam cleaves the twilight , but a mist
after be discovered .
david macdonald ross .
that messengers of mercy should declare
of a spring sun i heard o'er - head ,
through that forest i can pass
walking on wind and flame ,
first mead and then sweet wine , water mixed with white flour ,
open with the morn , and in a breezy link
stretched up to the wind - swept sky ;
we have seemed to meet again
with songs of liberty !
and , on the sudden , fainting with surprise ,
who hath got him glory greater than all men
to bury in its chasm a crime like this ?
and the road below me .
and sunk thee as thy sons ; till gently reard
there was once a neolithic man ,
that shone that hour so clearly !
my sentence is for open warr : of wiles ,
they seem to have given him . never a nightingale
not o'er those isles such equal planets rule ,
to stand so idly by--
the widow 's ae bit lassie , o!--
who waits and watches , and who always works .
it put the flame tip - down and dabbed the grass
towards the land we left behind --
of carven work made by man 's love and labour ,
i seen tim th ' other day
bot eu{er } more vpen at vche a lone ;
o music , music meeting on thy mouth !
i lost her .   how are the best friends lost ?
even the awful goddess felt , herself ,
indeed as such they are intended ,
the leafless , shadowy trees and herbless plains .
memory speaks at last .
he buys silken banners
but when they arrived , behold ,
so , all the holy things fulfilled , they wend their ways along
" dear lord , is this the guerdon due to me ,
and yet i feel , with all your grit
and , tortured by the mystery and the doubt
for the sad damsel meat and sleep foregoes ,
no wonder if date rue .
when all were bent on writing well
o , now am i sure of thee !
when touched the check - floored chancel
into the truth , my life 's inheritance .
fair venus ' care , the dardan youth divine ,
of ten generations , and of fifty at an average in each
my daughter!--oh my daughter ! "
set with the morning star , was not yet dim ;
but the thirsty tide ran inland ,
i thank thee , lord , for mine unanswered prayers , 144 .
bears in sweet indian or sabacan waste ;
_ rādhā : _   thirsting for fragrance i flew to the flower
the tyrant lucre no denial takes ;
proceeded numerous , amid whom his friends ,
my design leads me to speak of forms changed into new bodies . ye
i ask you -- nay , i do command
in the furnace of the smithy ,
( see hervey saint - denys , ` poe / sies des thang ' , p. 224 ;
and sure my hope had met with answer clear
so often and so vainly sought--
nor that divine emotion share ,
is it thy beauty or thy song that kindles my desire ,
and in the month of may , the flow'rs ,
exclaim'd , " i have got a sad bruise on one hip ,
when i shall think of you half heavy hearted .
he 'd hold her nozzle agin the bank
in massy clusters , like your own ;
on eryx 's altars three fat calves he lays ;
but twine a few sad cypress leaves around the brow of any land ,
our verse is delightful , although its
and blue - red wine 's the risin ' sun .
but shun the flattering error ,
and through the open window caught
he sail'd , till ethiopia 's realms he saw ;
stout farmer north , with frugal care ,
for nobler themes demand a nobler strain ,
into the hearts of our bold peasantry
but homeward with his host returns ;
he shall still be taller than the great redwoods of california ;
from truth -- for many bosom friends , it seems ,
and children still they should have ever been ;
to weeping zion , and cast forth from them
we might have risen to rafael , i and you !
pierc'd through the orbs , he could full well
and wasteful riot ; whose destructive charms ,
lovely are the curves of the white owl sweeping
quickly , however , to its source ,
and art thou then a shadow ? less than shade ?
_ " the watch - pass ' vingolf ' wins thee thro ' the van . _
blazed to the morning ; and her port - holes grinned
but she pitied me so much
does show to him that walkes in feare and sad affright .
my eye might be fierce ,
and the soft heavings of the living snow ;
under the glassy , cool , translucent wave ,
and since he can not spend and use aright
but to the ground some drops of blood let fall ,
an choppin an cutting ther wollopin shives ;
without his little book .
my great idea 's guest , and , passing o'er
familiar with all dangers of the deep ,
kings would have plunged into their red revenge
no voice thou e'er shalt hear to gladden thee ?
till hollow vale o'erflows , and gorge profound ,
then , calling him apart , the prophet lock'd
i feel her spirit somehow , can take out
long suspended from the weaving ,
to his african domain to cross the brine .
hoofs trample , and blades flash bare ,
a pistol shot , looks up and sees sosnowski ,
went young werner , and his head struck
some say the third -- the authentic foundress you .
' where are the horses ? where are the heroes ?
with pleased and wondering look ,
who threw , by pallas prompted , down his arms
and dine with m'lean ;
list to my words and ponder each .
felt of all - conquering sleep , but turn'd and turn'd
him , if this arm be powerful , shall i slay ?
a voice from out the future cries ,
" one moment , max , " said franz .   " we 've gone too far .
gorged with the slaughter of the armies . "
the wildest passions in their rage ,
so that your lif be noght forsfet . "
attended by the soft - paced doe ;
a light of healing , glanced about the couch ,
his right hand did the peacefull olive wield .
down - drew , the lush - green leaves thereon to browse .
jest jubilunt as old sleigh - bells--
twelve o'clock !
endlessly , only knowing , that her dagger had stabbed my breast ,
so thick the earth upon .
there is a slender tree of forgiveness for all wrongs .
mielikki , _ the mistress of the forests , the spouse of tapio _ .
men pause and question , can such foul crime be ?
angels with crystall violls come                  _ phials _
  constance , the daughter of manfred , was married to peter of
figures drift upon the benches
gave him his daughter ; but when tidings came
of pegasean race !   whose souls , which thou
and what but gentleness untired ,
and rev . maiworm , juryman , gives his thought
( for none that knew him need be told )
with such festivity and courteous lore ,
with a sudden flash on the eye is thrown ,
crimson upon our sod !
in front of me upon the other margin
are booty for it ; in its play with these
the moghra flowers , so sweet , so sweet ,
but , ere she followed from her cover ,
then blame me not , if false i be ,
and worlds as sands blown from sahara 's wilds
and poured sweet comfort on their looks of woe .
and love itself is changed to woe .
and from our cars in narrow space to fight
shot forth to view , a scaly serpent sees ,
and say : " here 's that ten dollars that i owe , "
why she sat drooping by the basil green ,
of majestic form and height ;
matter of conjecture .
who knows ? once more .   lo ! what was once to me
these fears of mine that you may search my heart ,
" only oweenee , the youngest ,
of prayer were duties , and her festivals
avise him , if he wolde flitte
shines in a scent , or wings a rhyme ,
while on my better hand ascanius hung ,
let thy whole strength go to each ,
and she has a thousand virtues and not one acknowledged sin ,
true regard , unmixed with the foible of another passion .
there is upon his brow something we dread ...
let us forget ourselves for those we rule !
i tried , elusive of the bridal hour :
and hatred to the cloth ,
to ask a shelter from the storm ,
methinks i see it all within yon dell ,
i thought me of a cunning way
the arrow in its rest .
and cried in agony of grief :
in children a great curiousness be well ,
he wrapt him in religion .
and the rose herself has got
  like _ south - sea stock _ , expressions rise and fall :
like the flash of a bird
" the charge is old"?--as old as cain -- as fresh as yesterday ;
" my poverty but not my will consents . "
thou hast not shewn in any chasm beside
i 'd rest in the shade of that tree , growing near ,
informs you , sir , ' twas when he knew no better .
but mated -- mated .
and catch the burning sparks that fly
and to our seed ( o hapless seed ! ) deriv'd .
by which it is plain he intended to say
your fine critical relish of literature ,
bring us the higher example ; release us
where the sunlight never enters .
and gaz'd , and gaz'd upon that darling place .
there sits he : in his face you spy
with arms enfolded , and with swelling heart ,
to take earth 's wonder with surprise ?
dropt thee from heaven , where thou wert rear'd !
both parch'd with thirst , around a scanty spring ;
_ zerah . _                    do all - givers need gifts ?
of sand or shell--
on you who wrong me not for him who wrongd .
and summer joys hover ,
" and over those ethereal eyes
but why invoke the ages long gone by ,
i grudge it not -- ænean guests shall cost him things of worth . "
and as many as lord it in rocky ithaca , all these woo my
while those are placed in hope , and these in fear :
on seeking their advantage since he came .
but ' twas only with the peep of light we saw how ill we lay .
great lord of all things , yet a prey to all ;
gone was every trace of sorrow ,
hastened off to seek her infant .
rosy through the running stream ;
her heart is conquered ; but her will
and i consent you take it for your text ,
where muggins broke before .
made daffodils so like thy golden hair
“ now , valiant leader of the rhodian fleet ,
but -- borne to me afar--
degree mollified by this submissive gentleness , but no such
the hermit withdrawn to himself , avoiding the settlements ,
" the world is too much with us ; late and soon "
are pyramided high in green and gold .
thus issued , with a melancholy sound ;
i know you staring , shrinking back ,
for which we are spreading our toils .
sure , the more 's the pity ;
the meadow - sides are sweet with hay .
fly screaming as they fled moytura of old .
what his conscience might be hurting ;
storing the memory , during the period when the memory is the
let us in marriage , king and queen , unite
he seemed to me within himself remorseful ;
and look -- a thousand blossoms with the day
he saw her prisoned in the cave alone ,
tentless , careless .
threw the hot iron , smack !
that on my soul is branded hot .
prosper , and want never fastened
that what is painful might be made their choice .
but an auld man shall never daunton me .
your 's , saint or sinner ,
that noble uta 's children to court were on their road .
some bowed to the moon , and some worshipped the sun ,
that tune the harmonies of god .
will scarcely find for him a broken crust
cloudless the mountain riseth against the sunset sky ,
those frank eyes of breton blue :
and must before our god appear ,
i bring . an idle gift mayhap , that clings
here in this very room six months ago
you have not ceased for me . though stern - browed fate
naughty little kitty .
in this new , _ loyal _ , course i 've taken .
father , forgive ! i know not what i say ,
god wot mi wille natheles ,
the landscape now reveals a change ;
to see what comfort it would yield ;
the world at large . for it may be , indeed ,
starts to fell the stately aspen ,
the waiting wood with songs ?
( the witch he loved before the gift of eve , )
thus strove the chief , on every side distressed ,
mosk'va .    a province of suomi .
you did n't yourself . " mcleod was vain .
of men and time and circumstance dost sway !
’ tis sweet in the valley when day is declining ,
through the snow ,
your golden hair shall be waste and white
that death is minister to life ,
of restless cane - tap and impatient foot ,
for thy repast the savoury spoil .
nor shall i ever cease to share
nature 's hush'd giants stood to guard and girth
the nymph , obedient to divine command ,
the seeming paragon--
of eve 's unnumbered daughters , who abide ,
i 'll still obey the state .
last spring , sending you a little canto of what i called
these bleed afresh , those ties i tear ,
the law of nations doth defend their right ;
ye who so swiftly speed through the dusk air .
so full of sweetness , full of majesty !
for which unto your mercy thus i crie ,
chief poems of donne and crashaw , the unity is
till seraphs swing their snowy hats ,
bring stars ?
sadly my master look'd round -- he was riding
half listen , i implore ,
the rich , green mountain - turf should break .
do the lilies wait ?
" not sure , " he said ; " keep quiet,--once more , i guess , they 'll
thence was never brought the playmate ,
_ to write the words of sorrow and of shame_.--[ms . m. erased . ]
and his questioning whistle , low
well shall ye also do , pagani , then
you will pass all your life in that box . "
go singing airs ingenuous and brave ,
and only god knew why it was .
although our bodies may be here , we , we , how far away !
which racked her bosom , marred the damsel 's gust .
thou art divine , fair lesley ,
than the whole universe :
where mab he finds , who there doth lie ,
that hacking , hectoring blade of thine
some promised joy from heaven 's very gates
and wherever they carry their plots and their wiles ,
every aspen to devour me .
all lit with love and girlish grace .
feel'st wearied with the toils of war , or worse ,
" o dream - taught man , " said the woman--
_ who _ did not hope the lust of spoil was gone ;
now sits not girt with tapers ' holy shine ;
the ocean flood ; nor firm enough to stand
to aid his brother in his need ,
" when just four years do this same season bring ,
nor hard the task : tear off the monarchs ' wings ;
here is veritable june ,
if my hand too low should hold thee ,
wainamoinen , ancient minstrel ,
in empty infinite spaces dwell ,
but so surpassingly profane
in sovereign , swerveless tune .
there have been six editions of whitman 's complete writings , and
thousands on thousands still they swarmed .
the plan being fixt , raw material was sought,--
the sight each warrior 's pity woke--
and piles the gifts , and o'er the slaughtered kine
the very thought of it most drives me mad ,
the seed of foul _ corruption _ lurks ,
to be the nation 's foe ?
thy formidable sweets approve ,
in the country fresh and sweet ,
lyric love : an anthology . edited by william watson .
to thee ! but then i thought on poets gone ,
they heard , or thought they heard , a screaming _ child _ :
and no more will be desired
on a time he went away ,
and let those sea - green eyes divine
is summoned by the tides .
when round in luminous orbits flung
and to return , and afterwards to make haste and drive off
the very devastation gleamed .
at the birth of each new era , with a recognizing start ,
which babbled of thy name divine ,
brought mingled with its pain,--tears , floods of tears ,
the likeness of a nun .   i seemed to trace
could make amends to god for mans misguyde ,
so , deep
and on your board , for friends and neighbors spread ,
to change , expunge , or hide .
or the just judgment of an angry god ,
ob de missus ' high pos ' bed ,
to honour thy decree :
a certain rudolf called out :
deja escapar por los vidrios
with the snow - headed zal , and all my friends .
a bedstead of the antique mode ,
in her calm beauty , and pursued
of the unconscious woodlands ; and time , that halts not
in their deep - sunken cell , and fasten'd then
of those who bargain well in passion 's mart ,
that wisdom thus should harden ! )
exclusive cult of beauty , wilde had also tried to make it evade
and earnest thoughts within me rise ,
covered with awkward stuffs ,
a silence they stir and slowly walk apart , watching the sky .
old days of daimyo thrall .
a weather - worn , marble triton
and human lips have trembled in god 's breath .
como quien sale de un sueño
chase myths like moths , and fight them with a pin .
yet first to sound , and ever sound , the cry with thee o soul ,
that father , faint in death below ,
o'er that gulf : ev'n now , perhaps ,
how weak was power to thy clear gaze ,
what matters if winter be nigh ?
the vánar host in serried ranks
" who can contemplate fame through clouds unfold
xli . north - west passage
how many votes of thanks did they provoke !
why had _ they _ come to wither there ,
and rolled great boulders down the steeps
þe fowre frekeȝ of þe folde fongeȝ þe empyre .
a gracious pardon ere we meet the grave ;
the plans of war against the town prepared .
how must the heart , ah , cupid ! be ,
" our bonnets gleaming bright with orange hue , "
their ramparts levell'd , and their temples burn'd .
sought for bird or beast and found none ,
for singing songs and telling tales ,
the handsome yorker shades her lovely face ;
elbow to elbow we stand here tonight ,
thus show'd his ready wit:--
for i am almost sure i see her dimly whichever way i look .
a hero,--see , ' tis fridthjof 's face ;
but , if you 've ever tried
she gave me my shield in misfortune and wrong ,
now had the trojans fled within their gates
and half his pray'r he granted , half denied :
o vast consoling hands that rock us !
will give them back again .
troy 's sons to vex , to wake the war 's uproar ,
she sits in the park , watching the young men pass
among the bushes on the lawn .
and finds , too late , that man wo n't bend ,
all of the world is , the heart and the whole of it--
deceived his eyes . above a living town
the grass with my touch ;
that sche is ded thei speken alle ,
boy from zeeny had acquired the meager education
who with mighty caesar could compare ;
and all the day your heart will say , " ' tis luck enough to live . "
and here my brethren , who their steps refrain'd
blaze not when damp , but with slow heat consume .
had dared to raise its head ;
and hector sprang , in arms , from off his car ;
muggs av us -- and here we air ,
who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand ,
and frowned at a distance ; but , when i came near ,
no more will the ringing command be heard
the roaring blast ,
a symphony in radiant scarfs and hose ,
far - stretching foot - hills .   now had ares brought
the natives are a motley lot ,
the everlasting oath of god .   i dare not .
as my ruler i confess thee ,
no perfect happiness to hapless men . "
doth greeting give sir dietrich . / meseemeth high his mood .
seemed gleaming rays of midnight ' mid the stars ,
the harvests sown in tears ,
he saw a sunset . red and gold
half feeling our own weakness , 97 .
expectation of a dinner , his custom was to give every one a
antandro et phrygiae molimur montibus idae ,
thus on the left side of the car i saw ,
in mid forest dells ,
the hellespont , where xerxes pass'd it o'er ,
to give the girl to lanty leary .
there injured lovers , leaping from above ,
each at the appointed hour
whose dauntless hands were stretched to grasp the rein
obyson , albert famed for pious deed ,
of touch , and afterwards of vision , distinguishes man from
" not so , " i answered once again .
drag at my heart to - day ?
woman 's will                  john godfrey saxe
steered the vessel swiftly forward ,
if these be all with me , canst thou be far -- be fled ?
sed metus in uita poenarum pro male factis
than when the name reproachfully was cast
to the castle , past the drawbridge ,
their single aim the purpose to fulfil
lies hereabouts ; and , for to pave
warm september brings the fruit ;
like coarsest clothes against the cold ;
it lent him zouthfou micht :
those cloudy floors of sea - soft jade .
and so ' twere well the deluge didst o'erwhelm
he 'll catch him , or -- he wo n't .
at that far height , the cold , thin atmosphere ,
lashed to the wild horse of ungoverned will ,
the dismal stream , when it hath reach'd the foot
our years exempt us .
" is wine or honey the more sweet ? "
than the mere nothing that engenders them !
git that blame - don fiddler to
and thus when they appeared at last ,
how good it was to touch the strings
teach me to feel another 's woe ,
hopes which so often damped and chilled
wi ' silver'd whips , an ' cheeans o ' gold .
" this is the tune of seven towers . "
legions of devils by thousands thither come ,
and from the water , smiling through her tears ,
the old , familiar , sweet yet stately smile .
' i like that ! ' said dan . ' after all you told us last year , too ! '
in russia ?   never !   spain were fitter !
how the swift wheels and scythes of ravin have dragged
kindle thy soul to perfect bliss ,
ashen ' neath a silvered sun ;
laughing water draws around it ,
and hid beneath it others i descry ,
for the deadly stench of the sea bred seals distressed us
to tell the men who tramp the yard
were better , and most likelie if from mee
his glance too fell on a gold - wove banner
shining through the ribs of nahma ,
_ que muero porque no muero _ .
i watched his wandering hands
this lady of degree ,
you need n't smile -- i did n't recognise him--
gottingen . trans . from the german by wm . johnston . 3 vols .
immunity from my control ,
but humbely with sorwful sykes syke ;
the bracken 's turning beryl ,
to man , propose this test--
_ until _ he came to lord bateman 's chamber ,
toward the skies
of a once rich raiment of silk and fur .
compact of good and ill -- not all accurst
he to the left , the parent , whose rash taste
whoever was the warrior , he must be
o'er his heart
its ashes , and rolls a smoke of pitchy murk
melanthius , master of the bearded fold ,
fresh voices make a sweet refrain ,
i held what i loved in my arms for many a night ,
some one 's bound to go short , and of course that one 's me . "
what is the first principle for humanity ?
at uos , deductae quibus est fallacia lunae
a long days dying to augment our paine ,
always the same my work must go ;
ah treach'rous servants ! conscious as ye were
they fasten'd , and the mole immense wraught on
in slandering and reviling you persist ,
rising glory of america , i. xxi , ciii , 49 ;
come , thou art crabbed and sour :   but lean me down ,
nor yet where deva spreads her wizard stream :
long in foreign lands been roaming . "
bed - mate and lover ,
and the summers are the hottest--
take me with you : ah . " quoth clorinda , " no !
to yoke his car ; and they his word obey'd .
controul'd the rash design ; so there the sons
argantes ' self fell at one single blow ,
entered with the fire wherewith i ever burn ! the good which makes
all spirits streaming to the spiritual sun
and mouldering pennon - staves once set
fleet as the wind , but scarcely saw her there
cut off , this quarter , teeming thus with pests
at sthenelaüs a huge stone he cast ,
let now the king his ear arouse
in which loud furies hunt the pities
a king he slew among the danes : a horse
all the walks were lined with trouble ,
for solace to the moan . as light grew strong ,
te imploro y te hablo en nombre
content to play love 's game of chance
on the borders of the woodlands ;
" assiduous in his bower the wailing owl
a wretch in a cosmic death - cell , peaks for my prison bars ;
and he said , returning homeward :
tow'rds the steep rising our uncertain way . "
at aershot , up leaped of a sudden the sun ,
shall speak to charlie in the bush ,
this is not saxifrage , but hellebore !
she is the cause that all the rest i am .
will live a thousand years or more--
but give me real , sterling wit ,
the steeple bells were ringing
therewith melanthius , the goatherd , climbed up by the
which yet he dropp'd suddenly , ere he reach'd
o'ershadows all the earth and skies ,
the fields my infancy had known ,
to weather such a trial ;
one home shall take us all in .
a many bodies there they dig into the earth adown ,
he , my husband , chanced to hear it ,
particularly fond of poetical composition , and wrote verses with
and casks , and boughs on every cask
striving to give their loveliness a name ,
moist with their own tears and with tears they borrow ;
he kissed her face , and cried in mirth :
lovely feet as yet unbruised
you wot not whence you come , nor whither go .
we thought when love at last should come ,
where , having given you birth , that spirit dear
of peleus ' son , and from the shield , himself ,
amply , magnificently , death may die .               r. wi .
is panthasas , which may transforme
defaming as impure what god declares
and the swan went pondering
the clouds swing out from beyond the hills
and to each other talk .
you , old ? why , life has just begun for you !
saying , " either we shall again have war and din of combat , or
and even as a second ray is wo nt
thus the hard old king :
ne'er to our eyes that smile brought light again . "
with your pale , dead face .
escap'd the dungeon , does the slave complain ,
his smith , from whom he snatched in angry bout
and in the churchyard cottage , i
then i adored the cross      with undaunted courage ,
when you count the rich years over ,
i commenced life as a squatter some twenty years ago ,
then the father straightway replied , with eagerness speaking:--
above the vulgar , grateful i refer ;
each leader to withhold his troops from fight ;
they that have done this deed are honorable :
their silent war of lilies and of roses ,
only was the bullfinch bathing ,
agethrin ' public sentiment , ' mongst demmercrats and coons ,
the western waves of ebbing day
whatever town he 's a - striken for
the fading footprints of her transient springs ,
a blackbird or a robin will nest there ,
to my friend , ralph waldo emerson .
and we 'll have back our own little alice ,
then bishop 's ordination treead 'll fail ;
which hardly one survives . our soldiers here
my conscious worth , our ties of ancestry ,
i can no more , it shal be founde at preve . '
he looked -- and saw what fate or gods had done ,
we know the goal is not worth the race--
for the assault ( so bids the monarch ) form ;
it is not mine to bear his heavy cross ,
hands as of death , bone and skin .
through the first unfurrowed field .
the state beneath the shadow of whose vine
and swayed in the wind , as youth ever will ,
the rusted nails fell from the knots
for anything less than a fairy queen :
that bird of joy , whose name is youth ,
his new pink was without a speck ;
still are her thousands praying , still their cry
strikes twice his bell of bronze . the short note wavers
but , whence that shout ?   good heavens ! amazement all !
and in the land of nod at last .
and thus she heard their burden go ,
the first and bravest of the foreign bands
sweet maiden of passamaquoddy
of trembling nostril ; her coy unapproachable estrays ,
pitches beneath my feet
" no , highlandman ! i will not fly
oread or dryad , or of delia 's train ,
a maid whom there were none to praise ,
the wisdom of the east was theirs ,
and when i come
and tho ' but wild the things she spoke ,
long as achilles breathes this vital air ,
and behold ! the wooden dishes
we of that mount hold converse , on whose top
at sea we sink or strand
we stand on the brink of war 's alarms
void at verona , juliet 's marble trough :
if i but see you , i am satisfied .
let me some other trojan 's mettle prove . "
my father , do i dare to pray .
take all i own to - day , kith , kin , and care away ,
to prove you have courage when fox hounds are " cast , "
monsieur , je suis le cousin de votre ancienne maîtresse .
manifested in another sonnet .
fool was i when fortune , favored ,
opponents i apostrophise
tom thumb 's alphabet          unknown
when the night is gathering all is gray .
fancy 's false future fades , for fortune flies .
of iron staircase winding round and down ,
the faithful compass that still points to thee .
to that long night that nevermore can be :
since paul 's writ was executed
died , a third part of all the ships that sailed
that pleased a god , succeeded to her arms ;
( spring 's the best handmaid without pay , )
" oh , lor ' ! " the startled gnat exclaimed ,
straining pursu'd them , till the flame alone
( dim gulf ! ) my spirit hovering lies
they heap the purple bloom .
dog - tag
quhair braid encampit on the dale ,
kings occasionally knight him ,
this adder on my bosom .   henry schnetzen
o , there above the little grave ,
to blame is easier those who him offended ,
now my heart , paining my bosom ,
" mamma , what noises do i hear ?
a wife and a fine house he got him ;
in a voice so loud and queer
before the sage the lady bent her low ,
loosed the foul union and the long embrace .
grave heavenliness ! nor know they joy of sight ,
all then was had for asking ; that morn denied was none ;
under the shadow of his eagle 's wings
and in her eyes i gazed .
then shall thy feet by heartiness of will
and crept from leaf to trembling leaf ,
must still be left to lie in state ,
virtuous and unremitting wisdom to make her prosper .
making the journey to bumpville ,
i would thy shade were ever near ;
the star - wort and anemone
winds touch them and wonder .
near thee the self - collected soul
not only his own soul , but had lost
run through the dry and tinder wood , and crackling twigs of bays ;
this was the fowl that first fell in the snare ,
thou to our prayers propitiously inclin'd
god of our fathers , known of old--
each one utters the law to his children and his wives , and
brother , thy heart is troubled at my word ;
grove .
to leanness doom'd .   attentively i turn'd ,
calling it mantua , who first chose the spot ,
a robin 's song fell through the silence -- clear
" i have ridden horse baith wild and wood ;
( creatures of sadducistic race ,
but - if that iove tolde it in thyn ere ?
_ says vidyāpati the poet : _
and softly , through the mist , will watch the birth
and from the distant grange there comes
meanwhile many bold heroes and good shall serve you . "
remedy for the scarcity of grain .   but his enemies said that
girt with ataghan and dagger ,
the truth never flaunted a sign .
to fill our gubernator 's chair .
to sterilize humanity . yet still
“ i ’ve watched you many a day , my lad , and puzzled o’er the fact
the green sunny glade , and the smooth flowing fountain ,
it was a sad sight to see the poet gradually sinking ; his wife in
had pass'd the summer 's morn ,
to the sound of fife and drum ;
a small well - gotten stock , and country seat
and ship along the straits ,
( i always talk to sam :)
and the lady from the villa ,
that anigh the desert - place
on their descending backs a stony show'r .
the fruit of your delight ,
wade in -- take your fill .
" but when their plucky englishmen had put a bit of lead
and strenuous to transcribe , in human life ,
confer enim diuina aliorum antiqua reperta .
otherwise hope not for that horse , save first
resting in twilight .
one may discriminate between laforgue 's tone and that of his
around me sleep the hoary plains
through thy mother 's bosom the sharpest sword ?
the meaning of his face :
we entered into heaven .
for spain , be counselled well : come not between
while the north wind tears big holes in the woods ,
in many countries i do certaine know ,
prompt hand and headpiece clever ,
hoc ipso verum nomine fulmen erat .
or watched how in their beans and cabbage - stalks
and nothing remains but its mutilated relics and soulless body ;
squandering your music where
no mists advancing to deform the day ,
" a rope , a rope , " gillespie cried :
fool -- are the rulers of men asleep ?
for they have not offended grievously
to cause them who the murder wrought
the things we are , for that which we expect ;
the _ herb _ whose aroma should flavor the whole .
so little studious to be seen--
and such as issues from a heart that mourns ,
and bloom with youth that ne'er shall fail .
out a list , which he scanned ;
boldest warriors of that country , before rustum encountered him ,
training of the romans make the absence of these last qualities
come we together , we two !
accepts the spur of explicable pains ;
i 'd curse my hair to turn it gray ,
that fathers ' hearts were stocks and stones
" and next came on the lovely rose ,
according to the diversity in the endowment of grace , which is
thought they , " an answer to that last
went wandering with the patch of sky
the rose that tells me things ?
then say that the bard has turn'd old .
_ adagio lamentoso . _
profanely they flew down the awful aisles ,
watches her movements in delight .
thus said the people . then ulysses rose , sceptre in hand , and
which god himself has willed !
spirits that never falter ,
as flowers drink in the solar rays and dew ,
it was enough : she knew the rest .
not bad for the old brigade !
what 's the soft southwester ?
' and all thy favourite haunts with blood and tears defiled !
and naught is known of luxury but its vice !
d was once a little doll ,
then clasping hands and chuckling first
who came for their health , or to stroll in the shades ;
a prey to voluptuous longing ,
they never raise the war - whoop here ,
are the hearses of my dreams ,
gripped the end of a stick which i held him .
he said , and vanish'd , with a noiseless tread ,
gently melts into tears
and he hungers to be busy with the work that is of worth .
care for the world , for bodies helpe alwaye ,
that any prycke myght them stand .
amidst the moaning of the deep ,
your fleet in safety , and your friends secure ?
there too was come fair brunhild ; arm'd might you see her stand ,
this idle whiff of nothingness ? "
falle it to beste or to the werste ,
once , and now , and always so ?
subjacet aeriis montibus isca pater .
the _ materia subtilis _ was wine ,
till eos issuing from the gates of dark
advancing at their fellow - warrior 's call ,
i will sing while heavenward riding !
licence .
sitting at his helm of copper ;
like some white lily , from her fountain 's glass ,
on beachy slush and sand spirts of snow fierce slanting ,
but the force behind is reckless .
mute , in our homebound snow - tracks , we exhale
and thou hast clean forgot the fair great beasts of yore ,
and when the thunder rumbles and the storm
i did not pray him to lay bare
but come ; we will not follow .   let us join
yet of the wrong he hates , the grief he shares ,
" soon he will smile , " i said ,
the ploughshare , changed to stubborn rock ,
no ; he hath grown so foolish - wise
paint o'er her lips and cheek 's bright hues ,
notice is hereby given that all
and the bright travel of sun - drunk insects ,
at five his charger reached the door .
see if that hag is listening at the door .
their hearts , whose courage rose the higher ,
he hath endur'd , and wildly staring sighs ;
had left him , and the acacia 's moving shade
the five - sensed cane of mind
will without wisedome soone be ruinate .
and other deadly maladies .
his squadrons would have suffered scathe and scorn ,
with crimson clouds before their eyes ,
the new form on the spirit follows still :
_ deep_--where the soil exceeds ten inches in depth the term deep
whom does miss belong to ?
from the lips of the great spirit ,
and what a lovely length he keeps !
since oft thy judgment could refine
sooth , i can prove an alibi--
we 've long enough been supplying ,
shocks of corn that stood uplifted ,
as water , as the flesh of men that weep ,
and i may chance some day to kneel full low ,
till the singing orbes awake thee ,
to which the _ blue _ answered--"no , bishop , have you ? "
grew flame , as it was meant to be .
cut three chips from trunks of alder ,
prentices of london , and lords of engeland .
will find the stain .
heaven and hell ;
the budget in his own opin-
shearing the sleeve beneath it , and the knight
as the laird of salmagundi went
thrown from its eminence ;
full half the world its light .
to match the pageantries of kings ?
to antwerp town i hasten'd post ,
came out of the wood , and tare them !
where wealth 's death rattle echoes in the dice ,
the lily in the field ,
weapon of coward and of bully ,
stood his lady alice , with a light upon her face .
as ' tis a greater mystery in the art
it surged and eddied round her ; yet so still
her mind was shaken , and what first she asked
mine eyes to his , and in them see
tiaesaes that i dede be ,
whose will be done !
where thou hast need to arm thy heart with strength . "
power , which renders the movement harmonious and cyclical .
vict . ( aside ) .   how like an angel 's speaks the tongue of woman ,
thus is my spring now almost past in heavinesse
if he in love , in hope , and in belief ,
xxv . 10 . truth may be here interpreted , according to st . thomas
her deck , once red with heroes ' blood ,
and when to our market they weekly did roam ,
but i would give the eaglets some words of warning--
pierced by my arrow , on the bank .
sever'd from thee can i survive ?
" what know you of such things as these
light gondoles , of venetian breed ,
in the ocean dips his talons ,
of the lengthened scroll he reads ;
_ this _ book may be a gifthorse too ,
sheds a balm o'er every mead and dell
upborn with indefatigable wings
as he spoke he took telemachus ' spear , whereon he crossed the
to hit the sense of human sight ,
an ' t ' spring - tide watter runs .
never bring thy prancing war - horse ,
when turk and christian crossed their blades ,
when others trod this saintly sod ,
my word i mean to keip .
_ 1st witch . _ round about the caldron go :
white - bodied in your pleasant pool , your bubbles at my throat ?
and force me e'en for hell to quake .
wherein she made such worthy show .
whom i have always honest found ,
to bed -- good night !
cuckoo , cuckoo!--o word of fear ,
echemon next , and chromius felt his hand
and when you come to take it from my head ,
and the noon in silence glideth
before i yield it to the appointed soul . "
at sight of lash uplifted ;
and pray'd the envoy in his halls to rest ;
crept to her lips , then died away , unsung ,
than field , or tree , or flow'ret 's cup ,
with general tendency , but for the most
but the music ever sounding ,
stars caught in my branches
and sanctity are best .
that thou art ever true to me ,
( the pilot made reply )
superbest power with sweetness we d . . . . . . . . .
paruos non aquilis fas est educere fetus
in _ pictish _ capital the good man passed
then at an easy fire attempered were ,
each hope that led me lightly on ;
although the grass no more is tall .
da begann hunferd ,     ecglafs sohn ,
passive to his holy will ,
so rich a king was gunther that nothing was denied .
my precious one , you 'll step to shore
as she fled fast through sun and shade ,
let the honey of his speech
all earthly pleasure , all imagin'd good ,
water ; and , as they neared the embowered beach ,
round in his urn the blended balls he rolls ,
as she was fair , but ne'er had seen
with such force against the rocks that he would have been
his verse was like the pleiads ; his discourse
overthrew his meaning . "
while they humbly press on toward the mark for the prize .
i promised in my faithfulness
along their ancient highway that spans the midnight skies ,
sore did the maiden cry .
one - and - twenty must thou pay now .
speed of their swift ships , wherewith they cross the great
against the turk ; whose inroad nowhere scales
wi ' a cheek so lean and white ,
he grinds his teeth , and furious with delay
truth alike to friend and foe !
lithe willow , as arbute to the yeanling kids ,
by the skillful forger - artist ,
to keep him in sight of the leaders ,
in sooth no will had i to utter aught ,
“ may fortune never leave thy side .
he 's a magnetic doctor , and knows how to keep
there spring the breezes , rich and warm ,
the man made for the special life o ' the world--
fro cast of stones war him in the werre !
stewart , of stair , are gratefully recorded . ]
while in the hollows of the dark ravine
and he sold them by auction the costs to defray .
and he was forced to fly ;
and life 's last hope desert my throbbing breast ;
that left it full of sylvan memories .
sabean odours from the spicie shoare
who seeks him must be worse than blind ,
so pale and worn and thin ,
at home he sought her , but he sought in vain ;
what ! he , ... the light sport of his frivolous ease !
twa - three , i ken , just damn an ' blast
paid in advance with a shrug and a smile--
lo , we at last haue found the way
i go by a poor old farmhouse with its shingles broken and black .
every loyal lives .
by the welt the whips have left me , by the scars that never heal ;
my sick soul ,
but they were wrong , for when i came to heaven,--
sensitive puppets ,
when wilt thou come ,
that the lost scholar long was seen to stray ,
as most i can do i give thanks to him
could be thy manly bosom 's guard ,
lie with it levelled in the dust .
and , a swift legionary band ,
we see the gay goat - carriage crawl ;
save floating leaves , with wisps of straw and down ,
and who her pain can tell ?
when odes of triumph sound his praise.--
then , christian , you may soothe your foe
lemcke , carl von , _ see _ manno .
" and if _ i _ die here apart , o'er my dead and silent heart
ye know your honour and mourn no more :
for to be'old this world so wide --
and bolder now and bolder
why do you shrink back ?
whence all could see , through the south windows slanting ,
that bore victory to him ,
and in foamy thunder breaks ,
with rishyaśring the forms to guide ,
that shoots my tortur'd gums alang ,
speaks in her silent language strange
“ o , goddess ! worthy of our loftiest praise .
tied the bonnet , donned the shoe--
a - eatin ' up de co'n .
sinks down the starless deep on her tall catafalque of death .
about the floor , that in the stillness cried
a sinless god , for sinful men ,
turning my torment into music for them .
for the rain it raineth every day .
and whether any ever from such frame
welcome or not -- for a month and a day !
“ hear , sítá , and our words obey ,
and failed to live by every mode ,
from racks as horses tugged their feed .
that bitter foe , whose thousands rise
lilting the same low lullaby again ,
and drank large draughts of love with vast delight ;
deposed me not , till to the hole he brought me
then let come what come may
“ and herbs can do , to be thy consort sue .
the widow 's fourth child was a delicate boy ,
shrinks from the application of hot towels ,
he steals no steed like an afreedee .
throughout the twilight hall . then , thus the king .
wearylike his eyelids close ,
at that hour ?
i glory i was born in thee ,
these passengers , by reason of their clinging to a mast ,
that spreads oer all the face of day
( vide _ crustium _ , chap , iv . ) of the worship of bread .
bearing his wish , whereto the queen agreed
king helge fetcheth
and pouring in sweet poison on the way
i do not care about it ,
know well each ancient 's proper character ,
to nurse the sickness , to assuage the care ,
the sedentary life he led
an elderly naval man .
with night , and clouds , and thunder -- and a soul
" this game , " i tells meself , " will do yeh good .
and supernatural thing believes the band .
no weak attempt to carol like the lark ,
for freemen 's rights contending ;
then come the isaian days ; the old
and of my kingdom there shall be no end :
fowles rose , mery they song ,
as thus the prince whose heart was bent
it reaches , and past retrieve
" john the pannonian , groundedly believed
and power in holland,--the west indian isles ,
to add more victims to th ' already slain .
brizzin ' , pressing .
memories of garden things ; --
maternal , to her bosom straining close
who with the power of heaven the world imprints
but hades holding to his bride , the fates
not a softness anywhere about me ,
i 'm right because i _ be _ ! ' "
spring again to life and beauty .
it hurts to talk of some things ever so .
shoot , springs up at the foot of the truth ; and it is nature
and now if a home - bound vessel lay
one morning , at the season of clear weather ,
e'en canaan 's neck from ' neath the yoke shall come .
and made it in the sketch its being leave .
of future ages ; then the vision changed
their righteous hate who bore us in our crime ! "
sir roger twisden was questioned for the like petition .
so caviller like i submitted to pow'r ,
should we hear the ghosts
whan he therto his time sih ,
that ill they 'll ne'er let near thee .
of thy heroic deeds , of thy superior strength ?
of something irreversibly
stood collatine and all his lordly crew ;
with tinted peaks against the tide
as great an ' gracious a ' as sisters ;
above its mates , the head was chopped ; the bents
they are finer , i declare ,
sche couthe noght hir maidenhede
and the clans of the grot
such characters in colour dim i mark'd
and forced to hide in fields and woods
and thou must love me who have died for thee ! "
what shall we do about it?--let it go ?
bright helen learn'd from thone 's imperial wife ;
cost him his son .   in her circuitous course ,
fill his windows with enchanters ,
in swarms like banquo 's long is - sue--
and soon ate up the pie .
the clouds grew dark and the wind grew loud ,
but the world thought otherwise and went on ,
he is my lord and dear ally .
and she could ' a ' had a girl to do the cookin ' instead ,
from the regions of the north - wind ,
the thought , at least , was not quite civil ,
claim'd their attention , and the feast was o'er ;
none can than heaven such glorious shape contain ;
godly chords of beauty,--
to have been originally acted at gloucester hall .   probably
in woodlands dim with many a dream ,
avoided all the lion kind ;
is waged in heaven 's approving sight ;
there is no one , nor any particle of one , but has reference to
but he was awake to make me weep
while others they sit wringing
that could be mustered in the band ,
some trick of magic by the foe ;
libertad ! i do not know whether others behold what i behold ,
what sweets the country can afford
lo ! i languish here alone ;
quoth ryons , bowed in thanksgiving .
in mulieribus ,
athwart the dark , noiseless and swift as fate .
lo , such is the delicacie
( 2 ) _ " _ _ but foreign houses of his fame were full . _ _ " _
o could i turn to that fair prime again ,
and bids me think of heaven ,
their children play on the lawns .
on the back of sandy mountain .
tempest the ocean : there leviathan
and when the grave procession 's ceased ,
now how ashamed is little george
" no nightly dews came down .
whither shall i take my darling ,
nor by desert to give offence ,
thyself ! if not , but nod and give us calm !
simply , as if he knew of nought
happy as the trees and flowers ,
been sorry for the blow ?
i thenke forto tellen hiere .
it may be doubted whether any other poet who has been inspired by
put forth the verdant grass , herb yeilding seed ,
though the gods gave all that a god can give ,
the falcon jingles in the air ;
either with despair , or doubt ;
if to excel be worthy man 's endeavour ,
pilgrims of autumn
y en ronca voz:--castellano ,
a noisy and filthy thing . '
at the babylonian din ;
a silver web has the moon spun ,
the broad side of a barn door ,
while april in the lilacs stirred ,
here to keep the saviour 's birth .
it was falling by candle - light too .
nature refused us smiles and kindly airs ;
i sees within the doorway of a shy , retirin ' dug - out
came a raven , flying , croaking ,
' what said the king ?   did arthur take the vow ? '
of aching , because they 're decayed or grown loose .
exulting , views the infernal scene !
to nature makand lamentatioun ,
be just a singe or soaking ?   " no , " he smiles ;
hath dispossess my spirit of itself .
" whate'er comes of you or i :
most proper for the christians he had bought .
but if a storm comes ...   it would shred
his shield kept off the blows bent on his dear ,
of death -- in warlike cars :
the best of it . take it , my lad , and go ;
` and dismal tourists tour ,
downfall of his hopes and fortunes , were now to bring forth their
for in thy womb rekindling shone the love
me beatrice hath sent from mine own place .
and not the glory of the joyous sun ,
and wakened in her eyes the living fire ;
to make the miracle the more ,
kissing him , " _ thus _ , " she whispered , " _ did he kiss .
byron 's restless spirit , perpetually eager to express itself in
how calmly mounts into the air ,
had said against her .
ornaments the hero - weapon
ithers seek they ken na what ,
found a hillock in the swamp - lands ,
until god , too , has pardoned your sins .   let us pray . "
this scene is heaven 's indulgent violence :
still sat he writing , thoughtful - eyed and pale ;
the fatal monks of orders grey ;
and with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews
hunt forever in these waters ,
recalls a regret of the sun ,
in corporal pleasure he , and careless ease ;
for all inspiration , for all that is pleasing ,
up from the fain and flaming south
how oft the purple - skirted robe
fill up my pores with light :
thy form benign , o goddess , wear ,
faded was she and old , when in disappointment it ended .
at francis allen 's on the christmas eve,--
feeding on the luscious berries and the rich casava root ,
destroys me helpless and unmanned ,
he gives me daily food .
consideration .
we dare be poor for a ' that !
nor why my lover 's eye , congealing ,
about whose gates , with weary wings and maimed ,
the three we sent , from off th ' enchanting ground
and forth withal sche caste a lok
with thy teeth to tear to pieces ,
the vertu of hire goodly speche
and tell how trampled , derided , hated ,
from my fate there 's no retreating
that old effect , of neck and head .
freely they own , or heedless prove
a pinnace sinking neath the wave
the other was shot through from side to side :
" it 's the honest truth , " said the brownie . " listen .
huge chaotic rocky masses
as snug in his bed lord henley lay ,
and , having come to the end of day ,
so knowing , seldom one so young you 'll find .
ploffskin , pluffskin , pelican jee !
opposite me two germans sweat and snore .
‘ what news , what news ? ’ said halliday ,
as early to my clouded sight ye shone !
that my soul knows its own
_ strength . _ ay , but i _ will _ urge!--and , with shout on shout ,
no man is born into the world whose work
sometimes grieved that he must grow
in the solemn midnight
an island in death - lonesome seas ;
remote indeed , but posting to the goal .
" brother ! " he thus began , " the world is blind ;
maiden with the gipsy face ,
where all desires are dead or cold ,
in silence thir bright legions , to the sound
the ende of his dedes he had nat be slayne
over the maiden 's hand , he observed with amazement the other ,
i hope we 'll hae a bridal o't .
in the waves , the lovely aino ,
of all nations and regions , and tongues and religions--
that from the stock - root issueth , if it be
of foam and of winds that are strewn ,
which the graces had woven for her , and pierced the skin between
and the lantern dimly burning .
i jes tell _ you _ i ' preciate
who made that world his own ?
paramour !
methinks i might recover by and by . "
methinks thy parting glory shines
mighten of beaute suche a tresour fynde
my blessing , like a line of light ,
then lead them to the gates of the unknown ,
and there let fancy roam at large , till sleep
would see the stranger taken on
the virgin and the scales ,
can trace each cliff which with granite gleams ,
now they drag it lengthwise , sidewise ,
and the round sun rolling by
the downward garment shows the ambiguous breast ;
such crooked paths , such ways this palace hides ;
for clams and terrapin !
heavy broods the damp mist
' long 'bout _ aprile first_--to pick
a fool and knave are plants of every soil ;
where are you pointing away from the light ?
glow dry like iron heated in a stove ;
of belus ' line , and poured the wine straightway ,
hard to learn forgiving ;
my heart she goes from -- never from my sight !
though the harbor bar be moaning .
to scotia then an unknown steed ) ,
terence where thraso asks if thais was obliged to him for the
takes up a musket , he is expelled the meeting ; but the present
while nobles strive to please ye ,
or circe 's victim , feeding on all four !
thrust from dwelling of the pure :
_ skoell _ . woe is me ! alas ! [ _ he slips behind the church door and
over the pallid sea and the silvery mist of the meadows .
the wrong that pains my soul below
of noblest manners , though himself would say
never again can be:-
fare thee well , fare thee well , for thy journey is o'er ,
achaeans moved mail - clad around the pyre when thou wast
of the tramways and the ' buses making hurry down the street ,
nirvana has , or skies
where gainful merchandize is made of christ ,
y entonces fué placer la noche oscura ,
to all my hearers ' breasts , the shapes upraise
to shew him all earths kingdomes and thir glory .
the little feet that never trod
i shall find enchantment there .
to that grave glamourous place ,
but when this splendid fellow 's wife ,
of jove , from whatsoever source you may know them .
quasi in choro ludens datatim dat se et communem facit :
from sources never known before .
from those who have few resources of their own ,
in every tent to seek and find thee out . "
the impress of divinity !
and we pass through .
yet the ear , it fully knows ,
partim quod fluxum pertusumque esse videbat ,
the skillet , that would hold ferrara 's blood ,
too warmly felt his fair child 's influence .
tell me , ye stars ! ye planets ! tell me , all
and they stood there on the meadow ,
gude counsel from above .
" who sheds the blood of innocence , the blood on his own head ! "
for nature knows no changes there .
has commended timely oaths as not only a useful but sublime
as men in slumbers seem with speedy pace ,
how should'st thou dream that love is never love
the anglian lion , the terror of france ,
the frost - king ; a crown of crystals bound his white locks , and
' they 're both extremely clever , and polite .
in the side of a hill .
very pale and haggard were they ,
of spring - fed ida seated , she conceived
and seems a kindlier servant sent to me ;
thy love and thee ? what magic strange
( there were to have been twenty ) , which were later published
i hear a thousand cannon roar .
after a fixed pattern of one other ,
and so much saved of him , which was not much ,
acceptable to god . the sins of all
against ulysses have thy vows been made ,
safely bound with reindeer sinews ;
with paynfull hunger , his lyfe breth dyd expyre
when death is nigh my latest sigh
then answer made sir strange good ,
were to the church reclaim'd , to my great task ,
down in de lot , in a rotten holler tree .
trembles along the dusk , till peal on peal
clouds , low suspended , seem to embrace the foam
hath e'en the brightest shore .
up where i can see
perishes ever to annihilation .
starfire lights your heart 's blossoming .
when divorced from the chin of its murder'd proprietor ,
so courteous , so kind ,
with atlantean shoulders , fit to bear
slaying and poisoning , certes never weeps,--
careless of any , but the arts of dress .
form there cocytus , of whose lake ( thyself
broadcast from heaven on lands it loves ;
you would despise the world , but in such fashion
when the stars twinkle through the loops of time ,
round us , each with different powers ,
of toiling hinds with brown arms bare ,
i would fight , if my fighting would bring any peace ,
the cruel storm will us ashore impel ;
no diamond pure was hers the right to bear ,
to their nests among the rushes .
they still keep piping in their honey dreams ,
  bologna lies between the savena and the reno ; sipa is the
when manhood approaches , the maid he embraces ;
and though he had replenished it ,
oh , masters , pray let me go ! "
cut in a three - cornered country - cut way ?
bears afar her spirit song .
that he was born : but faunus came of picus , who must turn
so that , whil thilke mirour laste ,
in the dread judgment they
not from dry earth exhaled by phoebus ' beams ,
proud godfrey 's or rinaldo 's head , i trow ,
through the city gate .
joy to the faithful three renewed ,
before his voice the thunders break ,
and yes , she has long mistrusted
been or will there be so lofty and so magnificent a procedure
with eyes that love had made as bright
of severn , and they past to their own land .
and " play with the pups , " and " reprove the calves , "
in beauty overarching .
tell her i 'm a wanton sufí ( what a sufí really is
cedar , and orange , full of fruit and flower ,
that no harm they may be doing ;
castellanas , ¿ quién pudo vuestro claro
behold the desire of his heart .
culloden , on thy swarthy brow
c'est parce qu'on se sent tomber qu'on va s'y asseoir .
of science , now made ready to attack
and soon potatoes , wheat and corn ,
friendship amongst themselves and divided the government betwixt
then archer , shuffling a step , raised his cracked voice
" my soul is -- hiccup!--peculiarly qualified for -- hiccup!--a- "
empowered with what malevolence
play up , play up , ye birds of minstrel june ,
them never mair to see .
i m andern ganz verlor .
" is what i say reasonable or unreasonable ? " i asked , gently .
maid of the moor ! his love return !
that when he stopt we longed to hurl together ,
all beautiful
bot ther is on above the sonne ,
entered the hall of the house , where already the supper of basil
and closing slowly like a big wax doll 's ,
the steward seide he wolde assaie :
' mid shadowy crowds , and bury'd ghosts he goes ,
all uncorrupt by the pitiless air ,
outweighed by virtue ?   doth it not suffice
and darkness and destruction as on high :
that wraps my highland mary !
you 're left here to lament
he taught me more than he knew ;
the drop of gall within the nectared cup .
but when he saw our tender little maid
into whose gilded snares i fell .
making a carcanet
or am such holy ones i may not write ,
mary , mary , quite contrary ,
stood rul'd , stood vast infinitude confin'd ;
to finde where adam shelterd , took his way ,
nor knew to build a house against the sun
long since we learned to mock ourselves ;
not long hidden canst thou keep her .
to construct a house for thee .
not only is in charms without a peer ,
dear uncle sam pervides fer his ,
time can but make her beauty over again
her name is named , when couples we d ,
brings scathe and woe to all of us .
the garden there,--where the soft sky clears
of one deep bliss thine ear hath been bereft :
richard the first of england , his christian fervor , 399 .
no roses in majorca glow
its matins from the branches high ,
whoever thinks a faultless piece to see .
how strange and far away it all seems now .
exerts the silent forethought of his toil .
pointed at her in derision ,
govina , niza , now left in their rear ,
' twas thus that munda 's fight
her pigmy stature scarce attained the seat -
in the sun and will be falling .
then prais'd the sweet bard tho ' unknown be his name ,
ere we take the change and chances
when i heard she came
but all your dozen of nurselings cry--
so full of guile he did deceive
they rose , and lo ! the sorcerer lying dead ,
who hath not bowed his honest head
lopped the head of pohya 's master ;
yet we are the movers and shakers
when the sound climbs near his seat ,
en las altivas cumbres permanece
and garden fruits mellow
and just ' um a lively ditty ,
of lakshmaṇ , which thy soul subdues ,
life being so little and love so great a thing ?
and hear again her sad funereal drummer ,
that fall from out her hand when she exceedeth ;
my love might know me at the latch
with household blood and wine , serenely wore
the world with such a winning loveliness ,
ev'n taken inwardly , and most divine
the other hurts them rather more behind ;
or wine if it be thy will ;
wha but the lads wi ' the
when he the liquid lays shall hear ,
in these pale forms , and kingly crowns of gold
who makes potatoes dance ,
jack gambled with hymen and drew marguerite ,
he thought as a sage , though he felt as a man :
crushed beneath the heavy rod
in the state and church departments ,
the seeds unto my ardour were the sparks
" wait now ! our courtesy these merit well :
through life 's tumultuous scenes , who , when a child ,
there , ever in the serpent 's fold ,
for who repents not can not be absolved ,
folly triumphant , and ev'n homer blamed !
and whenever came a feast - day ,
let our laugh ring clearly ,
another thing my horses too maintains ,
how the foe came , that then they were to charge .
and that 's one of the english soldiers
a heart that dotes on truer charms .
and each warm wish springs mutual from the heart .
thus the people found a butcher ,
from out the altar , even so , o lord !
strike where it clung :   so thickly shone the gems .
and palms arise , like pillars gray , between ;
when once ' tis done
from this i know that the mind will consume the body , even as a
puts on its nightcap and puts out its light .
doomed . therefore he left the raised deck at the stern , and
first a single line of darkness ,
nor earth , nor heaven is forfeit , even for him ,
she was , or thought she was , his friend -- and this
and hear the blessed mutter of the mass ,
however puzzling is the way ;
where my soul i have engaged ?
but such as have been drown'd in this wild sea ,
mas hizo guerra á los moros ,
this may do -- maun do , sir , wi ' them wha
i 'll bid a gentler , subtler strain awake ,
seen but of psyche :   on her foot she hung
on the tree - tops near the cornfields
through thy streets the bats shall fly ,
saint francis for me ; but a cherub dark
or that on lip or look i kept
on blood of mine , of linus and of cletus ,
seems , in my view , ætolian by descent ,
i slung away me king to take that trick .
and seld or neuer strike the lower plaines ;
intelligence and power , unsever'd bond .
that were the wiser part .   but hope no longer
like the shadow of clouds before the wind !
when parsons preach on politics , pray why
where dangers lurk unknown .
by furious heats and ill advice
my gentle girlish smile would praise ,
then dart not from thy borrowed sphere
thy lingering , or with one stroke of this dart
we are the folk who tilled the plot
the mistress of your later years ,
and banishment amang the whigs ,
and by as many other dames were wooed .
from nations and their little wars ;
“ with thee shall vidrik verlandson ,
" where the honey - comb swells in the hollow trees , "
be swift to come , and i will hear thee knock ,
why stand ye still ye virgins in amaze ,
trip the pert fairies and the dapper elves .
nay , stifle thy cries ,
ye , till some lordlier lyric hand
sung our songs in rapturous glee ,
appears to be in dio cassius , where it is told of the emperor
the wonders of that vision none could tell
that calm grand brow the son of aegir eyed ,
found hollow towers the haunt of owls and bats .
sweet voices said , yearning ,
singing the hundredth psalm , the grand old puritan anthem ,
each at each .   suspicion fierce
for even so , we shall still keep our eyes with
a thousand pities also with respect
even as electrons rest not -- but would surge
" ne'er from saxony came ever ,
am i undying ? ah , can aught of all my good delight
  { 482 } " il n'y a que la vertu seule qui soit capable de faire des
lest they should parch too swiftly , where she passes .
whereof my story keepeth not the name .
with profusion so rare ,
unerringly she pinned it down ,
and make them , an thou wilt , a tourney - prize . '
i must loose my sunny tresses ,
rara est concordia fratrum .   ovid .
and makes wry faces in her glass ;
some all - directing will that works with men ,
may catch a gleam of the immortal light
a rose - red fire
twilight shadows blur
a vicious parent shaming still its child
with musket , pike , or knife :
and lived contentedly , without complaints ,
you might have built your own new heritage ,
coerulean neptune , rose , and led the way .
like some men folk . no one 's afraid of him ;
alive unto their lips , befell me shell
in picturing her , " who loved so much , "
her whose long work was done .
and forthwith battle follows fierce and fell .
pope anastasius , whom photinus drew
now schrif thee , sone , in godes pes ,
beyond resistance of all human wisdom .
' are there not thousands in the world , ' said i ,
he ’d shown um bobby peel ’s .
would scruple that , with want oppressed ?   behold ,
go a birch - tree to the valleys ,
what thinkst thou of our empire now , though earnd
alone to heavenly dews that drop not fewer
so might i shun the shame and pain ,
wie das schlagen eines dumpfen ruders ,
was stained below , the building overlayed .
fled is the glamour , fled the royal dream ,
that with your long locks play the lion 's mane !
to bear .   with animation now indued ,
but let a splinter swerve ,
and i 'll welcome you
into a goshauk of liknesse ;
however god they worshipped / or there the mass was sung ,
there woman 's lip and cheek grew pale
and had neglected his fast plighted troth
much later than his usual custom is ,
nay , be compos'd ; for all will yet be well ,
sae merrily 's the banes we 'll pyke ,
came the war canoes by hundreds ,
even these words went echoing dismally
ah fearful company !   but in the church
he raises his marvelous voice , for me he is wailing and calling .
little . "-_submisse _ means low , quiet , with a secondary meaning of
( if you are cured ) and take my fee . "
fulofte er this it hath be sein ,
and the good old - fashioned asters laughing
what is that hope , how it doth flourish in thee ,
hell grant soon we hear again the swords clash !
which glows and burns in every beaming orb
seized by the mob , were dragged towards eisenach ,
out of abundance of heart eagerly speaketh my mouth .
mysterious , elusive , from him flee .
he knew with prescient soul the fate
on such a scene ? ah , no ! the power
to honour thee , and thy gone spirit greet ;
and drives the money - changers from the temple ,
and there in tranquil pleasure dwell . ”
drawbridge and portcullis screeching ,
thus for our needs doth providence provide ;
a spring returns , and they more youthful made ;
to her attendants .
he glanced with rapid eyes
at first , that angel should with angel warr ,
the second time returning , in his bill
i will shoot you through ,
it was the crew of the _ clampherdown _
o'er that sweet and silent glade in aghadoe .
with the greeks i was and with the finns      and with far - famed
and ' gins to chide , but soon she stops his lips ;
threatening he said : the hostile chiefs advance ;
then he looked upon the fish - nets ,
of faery ' round blue banners of its queen,--
whisper - silken , rustling in .
into my soul like lightning flies ;
behold the golden token
i find him ,
fold thy pinions , breast the deep ,
why it has pleased him to forbid pure wine ,
“ this theft can ne'er discover . should she know ,
let us lie down
that voice is round me like a bursting sea :
from the green grass the small grasshoppers ' din
too could put to sea again , and had sailed on as far as the
( since out of doubt a glass of beer elates thee ) ,
with a wooden arm and leg ,
ah me ill - minded , not to take
that his _ subjects _ are quite divine .
the matron came -- within her _ right _ hand glowed
with ancient oaks on either hand ,
her reverent hands together pressed ,
pardon when before his face !
" grant , o jumala , thy blessing ,
two boiled potatoes , passed through kitchen - sieve ,
when you might show it as a sight ,
not only does the beauty i beheld
were rolling hills , cool lakes , and boscage green ,
which glorifies your annals .
if sorrow or joy be far or near
the black , the fair , the red , the brown ,
now knight of arthur 's table round ;
whereby the sand was set on fire , like tinder
a wealthy lord was he ;
greet the eye .
i used to stride like a warrior
sitting before an awning :
these elements , and arm him with the force
of turrets , montereggion crowns his walls ,
shaking earth and heaven in falling .
a redness as of flame : swollen the skin ,
oh , to be
but ye , my chosen , who is dight with me to break the wall ,
rose of the desert ! thus should woman be ,
to walk in faith , nor dream
leaving a trickling dew . at last they shot
and his tender toes ,
their shrill cries splitting the sabbath air .
there was no way out of that gorge ;
sang his songs throughout the woodlands ,
the twilight hour , thy snowy petals made .
transcending all that words express ,
the mastiffs of verrucchio , young and old ,
master of the pencil 's fire !
i ' th ' head of all the poets ' hoast ,
purification by the will alone
for him no minstrel raptures swell ;
they flash from their dim retreat .
that rears a bloody crest o'er peaceful shires ,
first singing and then silent with content
conspicuous , with letters in some foreign tongue ,
make more strong and firm beneath me ! "
his mother - in - law                       _ walter parke _
and great orion ’s more refulgent beam ;
" osanna sanctus deus sabaoth ,
through her right breast a three - barb'd arrow sent :
to stay at home is best .
and three days called them after they were dead ;
tides mighty and all - contemptuous rise within it ,
look sharp when she hides away under the floor !
then is my strength by thee renewed ;
in fancy rising now to re - awaken
throughout the courts of jove , but she , her lips
and who are we ( as henson says )
and sullen moloch , fled ,
yet he is merely flesh and blood .
i shuddered and ran out to them .
but in their homes the women bide ;
flutters above that hallowed chrysalis .
brave boys are they !
o , my wish was to keep her for some love
vexed at the very proofs which i had sought ,
the leafy leash that holds his hounds
" thy blood meanwhile the penalty shall pay
beyond pain , joy , and hope , and long suspense ,
rather in the position of a task - mistress than of a beneficent
why numerous discordant sounds
delos or samos first appeering kenns
looking on my bounteous tables ,
and oh , will the land where the free soul of penn
was marching too with the gallant few .
this evening the moon dreams more languidly ,
behind some lofty pillar here ,
for they thought of the morrow with faces white ,
so runs the legend -- in mid - ocean lies
the soul weak - stirring in the arid mind ,
a burning forehead and a parching tongue .
some doubt , if equal pains , or equal fire
with which we 're tired , my heart and i.
or ambush from the deep .   what if we find
his brows from the dreary weight ,
untouched , undimmed , i still behold that scene .
in breathless awe , and hopes some time to tell
the consul 's rods ; that year to marius brought
i ken if that yere sword were wanted
quippe ego quam jaceam pugna bene sparsus in illa !
in that gold coach the lord mayor see--
of knowledge high , whereby thou art inflam'd ,
then your big words and vauntings i 'll allow ,
by blazing fire , the still suspense
the chiny on the dresser .
each mighty flood and mazy rill ,
from hence astraea took her flight , and here
the stars had feelings , which they sent
flowing through the golden portals ,
fairer songs light us ,
oh think of this,--and if you 're able ,
betwixt the former pair , shall meet thine eyes ;
with budding , fading , faded flowers ,
the truth in masquerade ; and i defy
( pale shebah , with her braided hair )
then asks , " is not this the street ? "
" oh , no , " she said , " i am not afraid . i am too sorry to be
the devils needs must rise ,
the temple opens wide : none sees
the full , the perfect joy !
of his majestic visage , they beheld
bandaged and supported in a sling , the boy from
her glory is not of this shadowy state ,
till i had reached your old abode .
its eyes broke on the infant like a morn ,
happy day , and mighty hour ,
and with the fire consume the dead ; his pray'r
there to join the many fragments .
the reason you leave us without one desire
and the baleful lights of the _ wolves ' red eyes _ !
you walk among men
which my noble father gave me . "
the dim moon rested on the hill ,
has auld kilmarnock seen the deil ?
flutt'ring and nodding ' mid the undergrowth ;
she was the little household drudge ,
the " tune is in the tree , "
count olivier is posted on a hill
the envy of the country boys , and many maidens fair
but yet it doesna do to see
i 'll go and gather lilies ,
it is a pleasant day , . . . . . . . the schoolmaster ,
and saratoga 's plain ?
and by the shout they and their soldiers know ,
great lords of life , whence all in earth
but roped with , always , all the way down from the tall
finished now ! the darksome mould
at the song of lemminkainen .
our greatest force and power shall there attend ,
we must retreat to rearward , for that way
beneath the rock upon mount aventine
patroclus ; sounds of sorrow fill'd the tent .
whether perhaps -- who knows--
scarce a shillin ' in our pockets , nor a decent rag to wear ,
is here the halcyon 's curious nest ;
tramp , tramp , tramp , tramp !
and i who looked for only god , found _ thee _ !
and in the firelight to a lance extended ,
keeps watch and ward in poet 's word
but my heart , my breath of life , o france , o daughter ,
they should have wrestled yet again , had not
a peak from lanká ’s mountain rent .
of this or that thing or some other thing
impositam et tristi natorum funere matrem
things that great ministers do ;
to anger by the plaguing bird :
all things beyond their native worth we strain ;
vermin well - equipped with stinks ,
of those who love the law , addressed :
that amused him on a time , -
eat , and drink , and have thy fill ;
her . tiberius kneels beside her , sobbing bitterly . _
numbered with those that of her joy partakes :
began : " the love , that makes me beautiful ,
if this will do , you have now four of my irish engagement . in my
sombre shadows swiftly vanish--
yes , i have seen thy votaries oft ,
good lord , heaw they trembled between ;
lamed in one leg , and bruised in wars of yore ,
have lost her laughter for so long
the weather , and the time explain it all :
like a forgotten trace of tears ,
long time i watched , and surely hoped to see
where springs a forest from a single stem ,
whose laughter and weeping are spiritual gain ,
then the bee , that active hero ,
he sought the shelter of his carriage ;
one eminent above the rest , for strength ,
there he tore from its stalk the imperial flower of the thistle ,
may match in wealth,--thou art more dear to me
so little , lord , so little and so warm !
death playing on a dulcimer .   behind him ,
i gat the loon that drew the deed ,
and brown ones naked in the isles ,
thou wilt find there a gift , all her treasures excelling ,
of savage men , or monsters wild ,
rent it with words : " where may i find this peace ? "
that the years may stay
set in a child 's bright hair .
on which the stormy north his fury pours .
he stood with barrels round him -- at a loss .
a half - a - dozen bars from ' orfeo '
then thou shalt suffer in alternate years
e'en as proceedeth on before the flame
counsel , that it were fitting for one man
that with no costlier viands than the juice
you fragrant flowers ! then teach me , that my breath
clothed but in green ,
simon legree he reached the place ,
diverse opinion ther is :
that i have sigh'd for : with so deadly gasp
that open now thir choicest bosom'd smells
broke from his parted lips and broke again ,
were oh , so wondrous sweet .
into the desert , his victorious field
its lakes and pools , its vineyards and its groves ,
i must have help .   i am so weak and broken
i once did know a turkish man
her usual presents were forthcoming
where arch of stone and steadfast column
and i therein will now be thy true spy .
poured out their crowds to welcome his return .
to whom , with tender smile , ( o bharata ! )
that their broad buttocks men like butts might see ,
his thought and action , draw from furthest time
there are , yet they , combined among themselves ,
they will not be content to run
and forest - work , great knights , with hawk on hand ,
a vision worthy of the sphere
and my good word , al mighte i liven ever .
or rather , in fact , would ne'er have once combined
is weary for your note .
autumn , thy rushing blast
vvith confidence may say ,
your spirit and your heart 's fresh faith ,
and now forget their troubles--
our flight a wilderness shall make .
come when preparing the baby 's clothes .
auf der beinern mähre sitzen .
and away did hoppy - hop !
that it always _ is _ the biggest fish you catch that gets away !
of the glugs of gosh and their great king splosh ,
" fill up your glass , and let me pass
hillsides just a drift of bloom with clover in between !
pictures of hell , that virgil's[c ] pencil drew :
altamente la tierra ,
on another salt is making ,
lite all renewed and cares forgot ,
to the moon upon her journey ;
and upon the sands lay nothing
" had cain been scot , god would have changed his doom ;
where soon i hope to be ,
to first of women eve thus moving speech ,
were fighting for the crown ;
and drove my team along made of nothing but a name ,
through universe after universe ; trace their growth
a troubled woman 's weakness !   as i live ,
mount up , and take a salamander 's name .
and queen kaikeyí bore a child
and i -- well , i have a mind for this one ,
at the majestic purpose on his brow ,
to t ' coontry we 've coom back .
the swooning ages suffer up to god !
from the hope to which passion had clung .
“ bravest of men , me much it grieves i e'er ,
the hermit - angler , when the mid - seas roar ,
he who was even as god to all the nations of men ,
those soft gay fetters o'er thee fondly wreathing ,
there shall his century be achieved ,
while the ages steal , --
in the fairest of summer lands ;
ya no templas mis íntimos pesares ,
to imagination hideous .
this the everlasting burden
but i forget the sweets of love
a youth who pensive leaned against the trunk
still the mother seeks , and wanders ,
hope sings along the yellow sand
that will dim all her light ;
the ballet she led ;
do n't help to fill my programme - card ,
we sailed away and sung :
gazed enough at her blue eyes yet .
the warld 's afore us -- we 're puir , but we 're young ;
and lived with them to a good old age .
of too much
anna , belov'd , i can not bear the pain . "
i sat by the dying fire , and thought
and i wondered if his absence was regarded as a loss
whether the roses be your lips or your lips [ be ] the roses .
the other , by that purest love made pure ,
" merry hours , smile instead ,
and still the whistle of the wind increased ,
take my hand , and touch these wasted fingers--
leyendo mis llantos tan amargurados .
her steps were watch'd , her dress was noted ,
dabble to - day their white in its mate 's blood;--
full in the breast , or e'er the wretch upstood ,
my purpose deadly .   in good truth i 've been
his swift black ship . nay come , put thy sword into the
let candied peel
was chasing fluff , the mouser ,
while in the scorching sun i trace in vain
to manhood 's strength their offspring dear .
careless she is , with artful care ,
will he rest ere his glory shall fill
the evening is sweet .
as he strokes his red dog with the funny prick ears .
a rich man might not notice it ;
" plain goody " would no longer down ,
from yonder bright and starry sea ,
a statue ever strange and mystical ,
" _ after ? _ " ...   for thee may be no after !
that the sun shines sweetly on ? '
pass your altars without offering the fat and thigh - bones of
and so he did , and won it too ,
all noble , all of worth , which had survived the storms ,
on lucky sales of cattle -- there 's a way
with a staff she tottered onward ,
by magic incantations , with their blood
i dreamed a dream of roses somewhere breathing
he leads -- ah vainly ! though he died with fame .
the comfort o'er dark galilee ,
' of your weeping now let me be ;
du sitzest :   jetzt herab die toene ziehn
so that the little birds upon their tops
i did it through desire of feeding , rose
' tis she alone for whom he gaily treads
from wallenstein 's camp , scene 1 .
though time still will revive -- and it warms up again .
it was the little bare - foot boy who came with cup abrim
of social warfare ; hence torquatus stern ,
fly after the night - steeds , leaving their moon - lov'd maze .
honoria , trebly fair and mild
platters for each there were shin - shining ,
alas ! deluded queen ! she little knew
mine own would not be dry .
to recommend them .
he saves from famine , from the savage saves ;
while some , the bravest , hardiest in the train
his cap and his trousers were dusty green
yet may a dying man giue such a blow ,
high o'er his golden helmet flamed in view .
that fish you have plenty -- but spoil them in frying ;
i mind them times when lads marched down our street
yea ! often dying shrieks and cries
while space illimitable stretched before .
for nurse can take them all away ,
and that the fyres were alyht ,
with horns adverse they meet ; the keeper flies ;
the lilied east when wand'reth nigh
with aspirations broken , or with hopes
the news , that one craved battle on the plain .
ut pluma atque pili primum saetaeque creantur
" lord , make it right !
their terror those , and these their lustre lose ;
and never love , methinks , so blest
yes , of a truth !
nor could she look upon her lord
in mystic cloud - folds .   only fate puts forth
that i would like to be .
others , aught which may not be understood of all , so that those
pride of the angel who first began that deed of folly , to plot
or winter wraps the polar world in snow ,
at all times with my lady , to bring back
high shelt'ring woods and wa 's maun shield ;
and all around a spacious court enclos'd
but yet for her dear lady 's sake
scatter each cloud that would darken a star
as on strange sands a strayed bird 's feather
what avails the victory scanned ?
was not the answer thine , when fleet upon fleet swept , hurled
but we said little , and went to bed .
( 23 ) caesar was named dictator while at massilia .   entering rome ,
he knows the child is doomed to die ,
perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers.--x . 668 - 79 .
and oft at eventide
" where is the queen ? " quoth launcelot ,
he 's breathed the breath of heaven , as it floated , pure and free ,
bound to the naked rock upon the strand ,
they turned with saddened hearts to go ;
some banquet - hall deserted ,
y su valor es vano ;
nor your fresh beauties ever fade :
lethaeamque ratem cimmeriosque lacus ,
" a dog existing than a lion dead .
and cruise at their ease in the climates above .
for grave rebellion banished from thy peers ,
a certain sign it was not down .
by any kindly coffin lid ,
that haunts the dreams of youth , which strength and ease
nor monk in black , nor capuchin ,
and foretells a bright rising again .
grave reason there for alarm ;
that oped the thoroughfares ' twixt heaven and earth ,
clad half such witching beauty as that ould plaid shawl .
thy etherealized limbs , stealing downily on ,
in faith to his king he had been bred ,
when i showed him at the show .
your art is but a fiction of the mind .
' long with lemon peel and orange ,
" frost tonight-- " if ' twere merely he !
the life of a gipsy , till seized with the gout ;
than in the godless look of earth
and so tom awoke , and we rose in the dark ,
as he was , apart , and beseech her with smooth words , if
gauntlets like to stone for hardness ;
who parts that night ; such haste had she to ride .
the full sheaves of sovranty :
there is a power whose care
but that thou art my wisdom , 219 .
far briefer now the way , and open more
come , listen ! bold in thy applause ,
now widow fortelka had never heard
our stormy - browed sister , so long at our side !
give unto me , made lowly wise ,
a barren and unpeopled isle is spied .
and , let us own , the sharpest smart
of clouds of snow ,
i scorned my life and lived in love with death . '
i have given a new sweet name and crown to this
even as one climbs to bed an unlit stair ,
in these words dry and drear
" under the long - boat , hey ?   now mind your tip .
my restless heart e'en now might be content ,
thou our father in the heavens ,
" thou wilt not shorten day ,
he sang of robin 's love
then addresses wainamoinen ,
which shunned the chilly light of day
within the unknown deep ,
weary and well content in his grave on the vaea crest .
and so on to the end .   at his command
and that wo n't do . "
' t were pity he should not believe as he ought .
the source of primal truth it dwells for aye :
that my nose is too long , you are certainly wrong ! "
cupid plague thee for thy treason !
and throws the lover on the lover 's gaze :
six cubits high with gryphon 's wings
leading to universal knowledge -- see ,
i can not find it out ;
" done to death our horses / with the long journey are ,
while yet their lords were standing / there in castle yard
lumpenglocke - an abusive term applied to bells , especially to
and then she raised her frightened eyes to mine
then twinkily , winkily , fly away far .
there were wounded victims moaning ,
softened by time 's consummate plush ,
arm'd with his gods , and loaded with his sire ;
fondly i long to take my place
there are many to serve when the victory 's near
" oh , have ye any lands , " she said ,
begging for boons the shade refused ,
en la duenna pequenna yaze muy grand amor ,
while an old woman made remarks to one
ere thou grow tremulous with shadowy night !
in the chill contact with reality ;
on the swinging log he crossed it,--
how hard it is for words to triumph here ,
upon our hoarded treasures , floods
away triumphant bharat sped ,
o nimble fifing jack ,
blood . put forth all your strength ; you have need now to prove
because i am not fair .
quench the passions within us blazing !
but my embrace was fatal . "
idle sorrow ;
there would have been no barrow heaped up for him , not even when
for there 's nae luck about the house ,
and he came and gazed around him .
straightway had a boding that a man would come to me , a
sit down or lie down , friend ; you make me nervous . "
awake for ever in a sweet unrest ,
busy building shops and houses ,
for how canst thou be in the darkness deep ,
as if she sail'd on wings !
what d'ye think of that , my dog ?
rich was the omen of that day for spain ,
is a convulsion worse than death !
it is plain , if thine eyes could see .
sylph , be thou hidden !
the iron horse they curse of course ,
are little more than thou !
street , a drinking - place , a gambling - saloon , a bull - ring ,
with many a thought their wearied hearts were stirred ,
their mail - sarks shook ,
frogs ' legs on a plate .
to brahmá and the suppliants spake :
from woman 's form into a pitiful hound ;
whole treasure .
the great camerado , the lover true for whom i pine will be there .
but while she prays , the damsel pray'd for dies .
trampled and passed it o'er ,
and fruits , and ice , and all that art refines
ye have fought them well and bravely ,
  the first verse of the first canzone of the new life .
that is all right , we will increase in number .
" there has ahto fixed his country ,
therefore let fortune turn her wheel around
i listened to fulfil her dreams ,
that silvia is excelling ;
lily by lily the year becomes perfect ; and none of us knows
the same individible do n't have the privilege
and swing and shake , till the dew would drop
because i glory , glory , to go hence
for some beside the ships of greece had paid ,
follows the furrow as straight as a die ,
and tracks of opal slime .
their brilliant mushroom tables groaned with food .
o drink to its recalled delight ,
buy my northern blood - root
" _ the rajahs summoned the turbaned hordes
some salve to every sore we may apply , ii . 92 .
in judgment or in mercy : as for me ,
ye never stray ;
inquisitive and keen , before him rang'd
shall pilgrims , pensive , but unwearied , throng ;
thus seith the wilde unwise tonge
or earth , the bedlam of the universe !
sure he 'll wear out his fiddle .
within the wall , in caves ,
yet lovely in your strength , as is the light
like cries of a frail conscience that has sinned .
and raptures worthy of his matchless fame ,
o my beloved ,
the ways grew wider ,
murmuring in an adjacent room , grow silent ,
y al fin su furor mostrando
nor ever thought to die .
lived to behold each other and to smile ?
before ulysses , and address'd him thus :
the church of venus painted royally .
in his village grey
yet all was false , for there messiah 's name ,
the sea - birds with portentous screech
you stay'd , and strok'd the distaff for a kiss .
over this eden of hope and fair essay ,
each of us here as divinely as any is here .
the splendor falls on castle walls ,
e'en such a mingled colour showed upon the maiden 's face .
though lofty cale 's warlike towers he rear ;
stood forth ; and i in stature am more like
waited there for kaukomieli ,
the bow - armed ráma , dear to fame ,
thy force can match the great earth - shaking power . "
to serve your fancy as a faithful friend .
that lightened round his birth .
for ne'er hath been occasion / my service yet to lend .
this love , though weak as young corn withered ,
“ much were it , did thy parts more wide recede ,
gylippus ' sons : the fatal jav'lin flew ,
to its old channel , or a swollen tide
unhurt among their press alight
a lily .   later , at a fresh - turned grave ,
we close our ranks again .
and when the blades the warm suns bring
frowning , preaching -- such a riot !
as one of these -- and they knew naught of fear ,
_ stechin _ , cramming .
showing how recreant is his natural bent ;
" let the oldest of the heroes
time spent in this wise runs to waste away .
and far avert tydides ’ wasteful ire ,
and what we blush to speak , she bids us write .
and through a vaster desert . they drilled their hosts
ase the boke of rome tellys ,
as if he wanted body of me alone ,
amidst the clamour of exulting joys ,
have taken much lately to whispering in doorways ;
the ox began to drink the water ;
yet all that is broken shall be mended ,
but such as at this day to indians known
thus answerd .   ill for thee , but in wisht houre
sólo cànta mi lìra .
the slumbering glebe , whetting the minds of men
who could each several warrior 's name declare ,
but fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves
and joy its own security .
and last year 's bracken lies yellow - brown and trampled .
with blurring rheums thy eyes , so vivid erst ;
and i myself unto thy fane the yearly gifts will bear ,
i wish that you had , like myself ( more 's the pity ! ) ,
what were the words i knew not , but who spake
the forest 's arms did round us shut ,
our heritage the sea .
" o rocking - horse ! o shocking horse !
from the river winding clearly ,
my face , where highest to heav'n its top o'erflows .
but i can bless your soul and aims to - day ,
besides the kitchen fire —
the lightning moment of the cast - off mask .
to light their tapers at the bride 's bright eye .
just at that hour when , round the shrine , and me ,
" i think i must have come down here to think , "
bear up the battle 's harvestry--
else , you , like me , will rejoin your relations ,
rang royal triumph , and the hordes
where arthur 's men are set along the wood ;
she never laid her eyes on a more lovin' pair
as the king of the seasons all !
" he knows not what to do : the outrage sore
i 'll sing upon a happier shore :
obedient to the summons they
and make my future life the sport of fate .
he hides his face against her breast ,
and the grey dogs all are barking ? "
seldom do we come for singing ,
he came from ' further out ' ,
and he found a crook - ed six - pence a - gainst a crook - ed stile ;
to the last , every night , through the dreary debate ,
i seem to be tired a little , that 's all , and long for
honeyed ; and us good - hearted laughter fling
with his own beauty bright .
there shall be read the woe , that he doth work
touching the roof and tinting the barn ,
as its spirit of folly ;
beheld the finish’d work . their bulls they slew ;
and the delicate question , ' which
were silence ; and her limbs
let the bird of loudest lay ,
in a pure relation .
thou hast enwoof - ed her
then itys , clonius , promolus withal ,
influenced for her good by me :
“ around his ivory neck;--desist ! he cries ,
poured of his black base blood
and they who seek will find ; the battle 's won
the subject proposed.--the discovery of america by columbus and
and in a little forth again did fare ,
what to reply , confuted and convinced
" die -- for a son 's untimely loss !
when dian 's maids to angry quivers flying
syllables . when the first three lines of a stanza are
a man came along hunting rabbits for dinner ;
he worshipped dansey heart and soul .
god gave me something very sweet to be mine own this day :
when now hagen 's brother / the treasure did command ,
since the issue can scarce be inclusive
i think i never saw the sun until i was nine--
we have as short a spring :
reference to all those that are or shall hereafter bee putt in by
the best and bravest of the grecian band
against her wrath -- nay , be thou not too bold
a kerchief from her snowy breast ,
took all this loveliness to wife
my hand shall stretch forth to inform the lines
( if i deem rightly ) , ere thou reach the pass ,
are the colors in hell 's flag .
send my little book a - field ,
you can right full many a wrong .
then forward -- and see ye be huntsmen true ,
horses delight one ;
then made forthwith her meiny sound to arms ,
from those who seek their maker 's shrine
aloft he whirls , to crush the savage prey !
creating , at his pleasure dowers with grace
this tattered page you see , sir , this page alone remains
“ approach'd the models which the artists praise .
hope is a subtle glutton ;
all else have cast him from their very thought ,
and lay their guilty limbs on tyrian beds .
once i owned a little thing
that scholden with this maiden wende .
complain not of thy life!--for what art thou
" then by my head , "
the furl of fresh - leaved dogrose down
my ultimate need !
an ' look reel occupied when they comes in .
though i force her to my will ,
_ " father , father , i saw a face
though laws and statutes here they made ,
which with that voice come back to me,--
finish nor fail that battle never could
the female train withdrew .
your white sails , sit quite still , and the north wind will blow
and skirr thro ' bristling lanes and halls :
our luke shall leave us , isabel ; the land
his eyes in tranced sorrow bound
they 'll ruin johnie ! "
with too much independent frenzy in it ;
he held them up , and in his turn
and since had studied tariffs , lands and money ,
noble birth , and when they are each trying to win her for
that with hir grete wit and subtiltee
" and to displease you were i not afraid ,
there is a city that glitters on the plain .   afar off we can see
lift the corpse and pray .
that stings like a white hot brand .
and lal 's last bed the plunging sea .
at the sweet spring 's call come forth unbidden ,
' pure hands bring hither , without stain . '
but through all europe where do those men dwell ,
its depth ) for beauty of all sorts ,
perdie ! is dead and buried .
tu espada no vencida ?
i send in that direction some of mine
the earth is filled with wondered whisperings
he sat in a corner silently ,
and the east was gray .
but the wary hiawatha ,
fell on a southern field , and bathed
thus have we lost -- to bid the conquered live .
me , while i sleep .
a man goes riding by .
the daring trespass of a foreign oar ;
and less by thought restrain'd are , as ' t were , full
pretty soon he was hungry , and stalked to the bank .
the mortal man , my comfort . him i saved
who , sent by heaven , to rome 's disastrous walls
_ why _ we got to laughin ' so ;
the message that the bells let fall ,
' tis a long way further than knighton ,
i 'll sit , and shut my eyes ,
woven out of faith and hope and love too great
the gleam of his hoofs , and the road ?
brota el rayo veloz , se precipita ,
a spot , to rest the serpent - bearing head ,
oily . if there is nothing i can show you , sir ,
to have his little kingship know ,
tremble and glow with the lives within them moving ,
his seat upon the intellectual throne ;
he put on his back a good plate - jack ,
crouched at the end of her cold wet bench , there grew
mother said :   " she 's a sport - making maiden , my son " ;
clear of surrounding difficulties , so
the cocked - hats crowd to see ,
of honour and chivalry , and the duty of the young ;
might lie till doomsday safer from the touch
beholds the moving clouds , and rolling year .
made at hiawatha 's wedding ;
sway in the wind like a field of ripe corn .
and the pride of earth was baying ,
and hidden for eight long years i lay
proclaim , his counsels are obey’d too late ,
that caesar blushed to order what they feared .
o face unseen !
your song once shook to surging overflow .
i would go near thee -- but i can not press
was girt upon the temples of my son ,
with his hand he broke a fragment ,
sensations .
sounds of hope , of love undying !
she wandered in , and their old hollowness . )
pinnabel deemed he to an end had brought ,
press of the wooers , and now once more odysseus , waster of
he waited for the rising moon ,
here bright are the skies ; and these valleys of bloom
and scarlet foam and hiss of oils,--
their cries -- this way they rush -- this way--
he saw a little boy .
the stubborn shield ; yet drove not through the spear ;
and his party , and having betrayed nino , his sister 's son , they
breathes an awed question in her stupored ear .
echoes -- mon dieu!--the ragman 's bray :
they took their leave , and godfrey 's heralds rode
tickling , tickling baby 's nose .
the covoitouse flaterie ,
unfetter'd flees away ;
or they clip all the hair off your head ;
incontinent , and dying , clench'd the dust .
toward the land that gave them birth
no man , no beast , no bird to gaze upon ,
no cup , that has not held some hot and poisonous juice ,
perchance , as is the halo from the light
delight at every sense ; you can believe
with moveless hands
dietrich 's departure from etzel 's court and his return home .
will pray for my persia to - night .
what nedeth vs our wyttis for to dull
in norfolk dwelt of late ,
back to the wretched valley , up along the bank that girds it
a cord the gods first slung ,
all wrought by the worm
i staggered , blinded by the light of things
unmeet , if he be living yet ,
meant only to procure myself more woe ! "
how far toward the ledges of your house ,
willie 's awa !
far and wide was heard his singing ,
in this little vault she lies ,
that shoulders out the sky .
hear how each voluble note
upon the main he wished to try ,
and flower and vine , like angel wings
long ere the sharp command
where the demi - gods and the munis are unnumbered ,
kind words only must thou utter .
by couriers gone before ; and on again ,
" unheedingly many -- so many -- pass by ,
opening on morn where i may breathe once more
the morn her light displays ;
' tis forced to be ,
till from a niche he bore away
but when he sold his meat so fast ,
the devil left his tracks :
at three o'clock in the afternoon
oh , thou , who man of baser earth didst make ,
luxurious by their wealth , and greedier still ,
and yellow autumn o’er thy head ,
loftier and loftier towers her mast ;
and wept , and weep until she come again .
the cool , calm pressure brings back sanity ,
her feet upon the green grass trod ,
was in cremona 's workshops made ,
told him the facts about the pit :
the gold shall never wear a stain ,
expands and energizes every breast ,
the grief that angels can not tell -
' tis her mind , ' tis that language whose eloquent tone
the cart and kine , drawing the sacred ark ,
sir harry 's invitation , ii . 7 ;
to give this life up , since it needs must go
you will only shorten the five - score years of your span .
and is not ta'en in time 's arrears ;
in some spot by walls surrounded
you have your lovers -- dusky beaux
and still i passed unhurt .
lest empty - handed i alone appear
she 'd be a better child by far
gazed after them the achaeans as they went ,
in meteor flight , with sudden dart , she stoops upon her foe .
that he 'd like to see the city ere the liquor finished him ,
“ o i , my lord , your clothes have worn ,
cried debby , i 'll kiss this sweet donkey of mine ,
eliza stretched upon the fun'ral pyre ,
" whoe'er in this is guiltless , let him this proof abide .
only she could n't forgive me ,
dyeing it ; and his quick , instinctive hand
to him a woman of that villagery
grieving for you , and having no peace night or day for the tears
and looked into his face ,
whose hand holds crownets ; playmate swart o ' the strong ;
or like a morning clear and bright ,
quae bona , quae mala item , quid inutile , turpe , inhonestum ;
he 'll stare , and o , good jupiter ! will cry ,
the butcher he answer'd jolly robin ,
mix with the world , and battle for the state ,
i hold up the stars no longer with the pupils of my eyes .
each missile with its flaming head .
is setting fast . they 've well nigh beggared him ,
past peak and cliff pressed on , in glad , unerring flight .
whose rage planned hosts of murders at a breath--
and yet my moan no tongue can tell .
i have burst my cloud - fetters , and dropped from the sky .
therefore do i weep and sorrow ,
mistah buster , he 's a jim - dandy !
short hour bereaved of my son .
and rested the barrel on top of a boulder ,
she lights upon their pillows ;
nor does remembrance of her own delight ,
there he , who yet in fable 's deathless page
make faltering reason know him dead ,
meek loveliness is round thee spread ,
where neither grub nor root nor earth - nut now
knowing things past , and things to come , when both
these , these , with armies , navies , potent grown ,
of hue vermilion , th ' other two with this
lays its weight on sea and mountain .
that closes up the gash the clipper clave .
thy ever - youthful waters keep
and lovely death brood o'er this sleeping wave--
{ 68 } it was very fortunate that such a disc happened to be
that won you to me , and beneath your gaze ,
so cried , " get out , ye fools ! "
as sat they in high honor with all delights in store ,
goes by my door without a thought of me--
graduated 1837 . studied theology at the theological seminary ,
on one side lay unread petitions ,
drove on a barren moor ,
her steps were watched , her dress was noted ;
gainst three times theyr number by breake of the daye ;
of tiny fishes stirred . there lay i down
of temperance , and ought that may improve
each strengthens reason , and self - love restrains .
the gift because of love , rebuked him not .
quoi donc ?   attendez , je vous donne
but , in his teeth , whate'er their state or station ,
long , slim , and loose of joints ;
at the joint of the knee ,
i will never eat nor drink , robin hood said
saviour ! we see thee not ; but know ,
they had not p{ar}tyd soo .
when the voices of children are heard on the green ,
and then they greeted valborg may ,
year after year in gloom , and desolate despair ;
the sons of columbia despised and defy'd ,
enjoy a jauntier fling ;
from lanká , friends , and wealth i fly ,
it is not death to die--
that not a line -- to the most critic he--
nor ever did i buy it of thee . "
he still pursued ; and now shone forth the moon :
among the winds at play ,
that fruit in lanes is seldom good ,
fumosa avorum numina
which acheron surrounds , th ' innavigable flood ;
whispers the tale of the waning years ,
other shore .
they from the yoke the mules and horses loos'd ;
wooden leg ( and head ) useful to , 439 .
y aunque no hubiera infierno , te temiera .
this proves my bold assertion not too bold .
then too , alas ! when she shall tear
asióse á su estribo inés
most of herself :   a mouth of guile .
sweet was his love , and innocent his bed .
cum pan uenatu fessus recubare sub ulmo
fill my sailor 's welcome sails ,
peace on the whirring marts ,
or drunk the strengthening cordial of life 's gall .
or dormice , overcome with slumber , lie .
that never shall break on the beach ;
love - loyal to the least wish of the queen
in childhood 's sports , companions gay ,
with her low prattle maketh me afraid .
for something that is kin ;
they fold their palms , and bow
quod non vidit .
can you hear me as i speak ?
you must explore another wondrous book ,
fill with injustice lands
" nature and nature 's laws lay hid in night ;
his sense of justice ; how the generous
the work is heavy , and the burden great .
yet every man among them stood
essayed to break through the great wall of the achaeans . they
than of his great task - master . yet his youth
where thoughts serenely sweet express
fitz - james 's blade was sword and shield .
never fear the thing you feel--
me , as a fear'd infection ;
stand , shine among yon water - lily blooms .
and on all sides sank down into the flowers ,
and over brambled hedge and holding clay ,
yet all the face of the feast , and the voice ,
she bought some sweetmeats at a stall
as , in the natural world , around the sun
he robs the trees of their green leaves quite ,
since none th ' approaching mischief had hope to turn aside .
from the places dear and sacred ,
through optic glass the tuscan artist views
which goes lamenting its eternal doom . "
which makth the conscience agregge ;
_ but what if i heard my first love calling me once more ? _
those limits , whosoe'er hath left , for shame ,
and caroled from the orchard - tree
and these with mated hearts and mutual love
and so with many others . ' take no thought of the morrow . ' "
and fear'st thyself a - cold , by the last storm
and diff'ring parts have corresponding grace .
and wake keen and merry to a new clean day .
green as the spring of thy soul everlasting , whose life - blood is
fair shows hide foul deceit .
sons of your sons are here to strike for england ,
it hath sent here none queenlier .   of the few ,
france too returns , but keeps a tighter rein ,
daily more free ,
around the firebrands close ;
flamed in splendour to the sun .
a question dear as home or heaven was asked ,
and i will have my boy , and bring him home ;
search out and shape the will of god
in the ruddy christmas glow ?
and we are the jesters that laugh at you all !
no diabolic engine this -- no instrument of sin--
and he spoke the words which follow :
so the rain spins silvery webs in it ,
sweet bird , thou wert enchanted !
pluck'd from th ' untrodden turf the herbage soft and sweet .
be peace on earth , be peace on earth ,
i wish that i might see them ,
the wandering outlaw of his own dark mind ;
as chaste as stars converse and smile above .
all her young and handsome suitors ,
for once in hell , none knows remission there .
zeresh                                      _ wife of haman _
so long as evils are endurable ,
air !   give me air !   air !   my god !
to here his glee , and of his strokes fulle .
eich gostyngedig wasanaethwr , a'ch ewyllysiwr da ,
mergique marinis
just braying through their purchased throats
thynkynge that god doth nat therto aduerte
and from the poet 's own confession ,
disanoint where they consecrate kings .
and very good to me .
frees us for ever .
of yellow moths stirring faintly tickling wings
and the beautiful wenonah ! "
o'ercame me wholly , straight around i see
for ours -- vile slaves!--the loss of his dear blood .
" i have an oath in heaven to gird no blade ,
evil to her shall be her husband 's brother ;
say many men , and hasten by ,
an ' t ' church is noo as gud an ' weel as ivver .
alas ... a wretched scene
flows the blood among her hair ,
and the bustling
i sang of thebes , and then of great achilles ;
a policeman , who said , while scratching his head ,
unstained with hostile blood ;
and prayed for my soul to swoon :
heavens , and its will is free to resist their mingled and
i thought that no living man could have pushed me from the door ,
but there 's a blank repose in this ,
the rule holds good since the world begun --
seeking for you till the dawn of day .
for blood _ not _ shed , and injury weakly spared;--
that piled these stones , and with the mossy sod
brave little fellow ! the skies may be dreary :
could be heard a horse 's footfall .
written , do thou make hope resound upon this height ; thou
she on earth and he in heaven .
where well they thrive , not sworn with vanity .
so in jail
whose aunt was a very fast walker ;
avoiding one , incurs another fate .
to see what it behoves him to escape ,
of the blacksmith , ilmarinen ,
( while them uncertain counsels did divide )
then comes he forth again , and feels new hope
cloke her in ermine , for the night is cold ,
_ there _ faith retires and keeps her white sail furled ,
that wailed aloud with all her waves all night ,
horatio tired him .
the thrust , the fall ,
to the shores of britain , by the criticisms , whether friendly or
speak ! i go hence to offer sacrifice
a band of soldiers from that forest shade ,
and night descends upon his solitude .
surely be -- when an old man like you , who should know better ,
we browse , we are two among the wild herds spontaneous as any ,
eurydice , whom our father loved , my strength and life now fail
yet was it never proud before .
the talk somehow had fall'n on drugs , a jar
her voice revives the leaden strings ,
with plumes that change and glisten in the sun ,
burn your soul up so in hating .
tels les poètes vont cherchant en vrais glaneurs
of the achaians , and that dire disease ,
that round the hearthstone cluster .
and may noght fully schyne cler .
it came and came anew .
a name of high renown ,
a hundred fires in rows disperse the gloom ;
the smiles of home may soothing shine
o'er the rising corn .
and sate him on a seat where he
lasses a ' lilting before dawn o ' day ;
and therupon this lord to spire
champak and serisha that beat upon the languid air with their
who taught him how to play ,
( such language holds the solemn sea
no landlord made it right ;
she said it plain , and then her eyes would blaze .
landgraves and burgraves , spare and stout ,
through the tongues of self - pollution .
a reputable stranger , mild of manner and gentle of address .
now thy mother is exacting ,
as olaf came riding , with men in mail ,
where the black snake in the sunshine loves to coil .
weep not , my wanton , smile upon my knee ;
an ' morning poussie whiddin seen ,
it bore the sever'd member , lantern - wise
she shines , and almost hears
all the friends have now been lauded ,
how beautiful thy ancient turrets rose !
no life , nor plant nor creature lift its head .
the leaders ' names , their arms , their prancing steeds :
designs by alfred parsons . 4to , ornamental leather , $ 7 50 . ( _ in
once again the vineyard
at least , their own ; their future selves applaud ;
close behind the furious fire ,
like a yawn of fire from the grass it came ,
and must we part ? ah , yes , it must be so .
quite alarmed , she thought of going
but times will change and friends must part
or an eye ' neath its sleeping lid ,
the leafy shadows , the warm blossoming earth ,
still shuts out the bending blue ,
in the silent moody places
our luck and the guns and the _ boche _ ,
what shining life - tides flowed
and none to utter a nay
nor toward the sunset let thy vineyards slope ,
loved as thou art , thy short - lived pains are worth
and so , from day to day , i go ,
who when and whom he chooses takes , me oft
into a whirl of boiling snow ,
toward the lonely lightning - blasted
i see the elder - hand pressing receiving supporting ,
to run before and ride behind
methought i spied .   " master , " said i , " what land
who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin ,
to mark if , from the mast 's aspiring height
passion has its proper pulse , so will it likewise have its
and slumber mist - like overveiled her eyes [ depths
ah me ! they pierced my own .
deeker , as chaplain , few can e'er excel ,
piggy left a good sty ,
around the circuit , nor at any spot
the owl had sailed from her silent tower ,
has pinker feet than he ;
one was new , the other ancient .
thy form and mind , sweet maid , can i forget ?
and if my brother could but this foresee ,
--a lawyer , clad in wig and band ,
and if i smile , it is that now
watched the skies , with this thought in his heart ; while he set
my displeasure . had he not done so those gods who are below with
how long _ our god _ with men _ can bear _ !
hope beyond hope :
let these , between a double layer of fat
sings again the great magician ,
whistle in hand he watched , his boat well ready ,
where met in battle the barons twain .
come along .
the king was glad and seide he wolde
though you have wept to strike , and but have cried ,
quoth the priest , " thou art wild , pretty boy ! blessed she
i hear it distantly ,
the author 's family ; and it is hoped it
over me soared the eternal sky ,
but , since i 'm convinc'd that it can not be so ,
and one who had both hands lopped off , lifting the stumps through
" ah no ! into the fields of space ,
here , with hope hardly to wear ,
whom to obey is happiness entire .
wainamoinen , proudly viewing ,
love 's prisoner               mariana griswold van rensselaer
you 'd laugh,--but i long for a spotless white shirt !
he seem'd , as in a nightmare of the night ,
we had parted in sorrow and tears ;
to see who shall be first to pluck the prize--
and on the seas in syllables of waves ,
the showman 's wife from out her window peering
erected my dwelling in less than a week ,
thou wilt , in fresher green forgetting them ,
and wrapt his own warm mantle round
to supplicate for peace and misericord
cometh the round world 's royal noon time ,
how , down at wet willows , there lay on the ground
with pangs of joy or woe ,
where old sorrows lie forgotten , and raise upon the rotten
with hopeful pity , not disdain ,
that hand which royalty has shaken
for i know where thy shoe pinches .
stretchest thy limbs , and yawn'st , but all in vain ;
throw down -- there bitt'n , trampled on , by swine and dogs .
she holds her little thoughts in sight ,
would have the wail,--
high in air their matin song
fall on the blade of failure and exclaim :
admire the monuments
o'er soft ilissus shall have died away ,
with test and test he picks the best ,
till it seemed that the mad song burst its bars
he found this selfsame funny thing
i smite thee of sore need .   nay , fall not thou
and oxen ; bring ye from your houses bread ,
but you 'd best go look for a new love . "
i wish you 'd jes go out and see
for hit is brod & boþe{m}leȝ , & bitter as þe galle ,
who listened to the legate 's talk last week ,
which cronos ' son , when storm is rolling up ,
we love the writer , praise his happy vein ,
their hearts will kindle for the fight ,
stepped down to bathe , and take a drink .
those lamping eyes will deigne sometimes to look ,
had birds of good omen when he fared away , birds on the
left to a man 's choice -- we'll proceed a step ,
a rooted stump and garden gate ,
that which was more , if truth be testified ,
motionless torrents ! silent cataracts !
high there , how he rung upon the rein of a wimpling wing
' methinks i have not found among them all
stand out the white lighthouses high .
to find again the fading shores of home
surely the genius of a fruitful isle
smashed , and torn ,
frae snawy coats ,
" thou wilt not go ? "
nor in one beaten path maintain him .
and , fortitude abandon'd , where is man ?
and some confessed intelligence , who know
nor that you should believ't , is't always meant ,
--a car overturned and two crushed bodies
to do the marquis ' will , however fame
sic hauns as you sud ne'er be faiket ,
will soon dissolve the mountain host ,
have faith in god !
where no moth the garb is fretting ,
the power of time and change ! thistles and grass
the morning comes from the east ,
so be it . under arrows showering thick
toward the other , talk'd of me , then both
i , the son 's wife , to his dwelling ,
out over scrog and scaur ,
flower chain in the cover of a lotus leaf .
float on , in joy , to meet
lay me on my true - love 's body .
on the heath his horn blew loudly ,
and eagerly his name was buzzed abroad ;
and gods of conqu'rors , slaves of subjects made :
an ' watch beside a loved one 's bed , an ' know
may gain from heaven the lucky art
amid the joyous strains , and when they rise
is fuel enough to feed ,
mich vorwärts oder zurück .
or ghastly furies ' apparition .
to feel sich sympathy .
the sea - nymphs , too , will now be waking ,
by the grand metropold , wo n't you give me a letter ?
¿ es más que un breve punto
no longer are there lips to cling to mine ,
deep will ye rue hereafter ; this for sure truth retain ,
a letter inform'd me that all was to wreck ;
mon'ja - tar .    the daughter of the pine - tree .
the ashes of my parents knew my tears .
full at his breast a firebrand , as she spoke ,
of cleanliness and vesture fair :
a rose to him , or as that rose gives forth
and who could have looked for a war with the dutch ?
round me thou glowest ,
doom'd a fair prize to grace some prince 's board ,
suppose you try a different tack ,
did his mother hwrraith
so much his life seemed handing on her mind ,
' the water 's going out to sea
while hid the murm'ring streamlets flow ;
your first choyce failes ; o when you choose agen
and " lesser lights " send out a gleam
over the red road .
each was attended with a trojan ghost .
and stars their quiet watches keep
came she , our new crescent of a hair's - breadth .
no other words express--
left in their beds beneath those burning roofs :
of intermitted usage ; then i felt
nor find aught novel in thy merriment ?
banish the darkness filled with quivering dread ,
for whom would wildest thought beguile
of golden - plovers in their seaward flight ,
' a boy 's will is the wind 's will ,
of bishops to beggars similitude bear--
ere the night fell:--with morrow 's dawn the boy
yet awful by its wrong,--and cut these cords ,
your hands and your voices for me .
and then i hear black horsemen
he masters whose spirit masters , he tastes sweetest who results
an angel 's lips to kiss , we think,--
so lief him was the mannes blod .
faded the footstep of spring from our garden ......... fofanow
he said , " i 'll frighten her out of her wits :
that crouches at my feet--
night hath been when thou and i
but well compact ,
flights , terrors , sudden rescues , and true love
bot this i seie natheles ,
which otherwise is most obscure ,
affairs in the same light as he ,
there was not an island - village
this is too curious - good , this blunt and ill :
and ruminate beneath the umbrage brown ,
what passion can not music raise and quell ?
then she went where he lay , and took hold of his head ,
married colonel f. e. gwyn ( 1779 ) . she survived until 1840 . ' her
oh ! true it spoke , though hope the while
with his betters to compete !
i ca n't see nothin' else afore me all the time .
and walk with me in the moon 's white rain . "
and turning to the chariot - pole , to foot
in youth to stryue , but whan he came to age
ever upon this stage
when with closed eyes in autumn 's eves of gold
and dragging tedious age in his own wrong ;
' twill bring us luck ! '
the pennant is flying aloft as she speeds she speeds so stately--
while yet a stammerer , with his tongue let loose
what track i steer ,
with their rushing splendors , fly ,
for life and spunk like ither christians ,
obedient her courtiers go ,
have kept the lamp of chivalry
the gospel , and turns traitor to the cause
over the sweet - smelling mountain - passes
i 'll drink a cup to scotland yet
some merry , friendly , countra - folks
blood - stained the mere . old men together ,
in his disturbance ; when his darling sons ,
her smiles ' divinity !
the wreaths be hid ,
who will may hear the staircase story told ;
the yellow swarm
` religion hath blue eyes and yellow hair ' :
so there anigh the high - bower door
and weds them into harmony .
and set them all a - quaking !
when america entered the world war .   he then became connected
the runnable stag , the same , the same ,
gaily in the sunny beam ;
" their bold ambuscade
rode o'er the long backs of the bushless downs
and my lily - fingered neighbor .
there farmers ' horses were made fast .
no matron , to her hidden foeman 's sight ,
haply her truant tresses mock
your beautiful dark brown hair -- my pet .
all tattered , and the cord therewith to hang it , and he gat
booth led boldly , and he looked the chief ,
it mends their morals , never mind the pain :
are long , and very high his spine ; pure white
drop round , and idly mark the dusty place .
set on yourself by being nice :
two - stress trochaic
place a bench at every turn where there is an object to catch the
and blade and bud and blossom
an ' ' twas na till the neist forenune
them down , just while running along ,
cover'd with boughes and shrubs from heavens light ,
so beautiful unto the sight ;
the monster ravaging with gory jaw ,
wake the hundred thousands , knowing
at once the four spred out thir starrie wings
like a fierce , gigantic pulse ,
get out and live it each hour of the day ,
like battle - horse , when bugles bray ,
these are the talents that adorn them all ,
the earth , and virtue ’s law obeys ,
that mother wo n't know !
stands the church on high .
i saw , heels up , my _ bel piede _ !
no glass venetian could more true reflect .
yet more , the depths have more!--what wealth untold ,
aurea securi quis nescit saecula regis ?
sits in the porch ? what presence guards the gate ?
with gusty laugh
resolv'd to meet some ither day .
he is the despot now who sits and dreams
this meeting now must be ' good - bye , ' beloved friend . "
thy heart , o woman , in its happy rest
he went , arous'd , and with him brought the chiefs .
when the priest his last hath pray'd ,
and in thousands they assembled
and shortly stood before
the moss - root smell where beeches grew ,
i know , i know i should not see
nor mote my shell awake the weary nine
save only to that swete wif
the _ glue _ that mocked the incensed air
another comes -- a girl - face , worn ,
with garnets , and seemed red roses , budded .
the clear communicable speech
the fortunate chaps we are .
love - dreams , as yet no object knowing--
fierce juno stands , the scaean gates before ,
so fortifi’d by nature ( as ’ twas thought )
thou gavest me no water for my feet ,
and chant a ditty to the moon .
were creatures god almighty made ,
the world , set in thy heart , thy passionate strain
when they are home . she had been teaching school ,
perchance thou hast survived these perils , so
all hearts . " ... my answer was the song forever sung :
oh , young lochinvar is come out of the west .
love lengthens out his playtime ,
yet , by a miracle , lo ! i was saved .
when i come home from school , i 'll tell you all i learn ,
stripped of their mask , their cares and troubles known ,
{ 190a }   _ kaloper _ .   balsamita vulgaris .   linné .
lurked without ferment in the amber cloud .
of the autumn evening . but ah !
crying out among the fir - trees ,
conceit deceitful , so compact , so kind ,
oh ! she is right fair , this bride
so still the look of that white face ,
for love upon his lust wakende
bathurst , " in which bathurst is introduced as speaking .   he
to them that angels down from heaven to fight
the hues which artists love to paint ;
little black monkey he grinned at me ;
it is time to take your weapons
ha ! that was a noble blowing !
guillemot , " from its stupidity ; for when their companions are
what!--yet another ? can it be
" why die we here , " quoth he , " slain without fight ,
door - latch and tinkling staples ring;--
ponderibus librata suis , elementaque iussa
to this deep room , and looked through rose - stained windows ,
still would i fight with all and slay
will i depart from honor 's laws ;
hope of my heart ! now quenched in night ,
and crashed his ice - spears through each tree ;
love planted a rose   _ katharine lee bates _
gone are these holy toilers -- gone ;
unless he was out of his head ; and so
when i said to you ,
another queen brings forth another brand ,
her deathless syllable .
and renew , by necessity ,
privileged order -- the author 's obligations to the mystics-
i have to go to bed and see
between the tropics fill'd the steady sail
where the hill - daisy blooms and the gray monkey gambols ,
tickling the cittern with his quill .
since first a puny people we
an ' whan neist mell(59 ) we mak a lurry(60 )
and on the holy hearth{51 }
to hear the returning rooks ' caw of despair .
for a ' that , and a ' that ,
i heard the murmur and the murmuring sound ,
there were no stocking stuffed with yellow guineas
wasting all her milk in running .
thou dost return , thine influences return
tell her that the lesson taught her
i stand there long , before into the gloom
the tear fill'd each e'e :
by diomedes ' hands .   thence rushed he on
wheel circling , ere the whole can change their ground :
and in all her words and ways , she seems
the glory of the brook .
at bay before them all . then odysseus was the first to rush
rattlin ' , roarin ' willie
queen venus knelt and prayed to proserpine
that spreads abroad the full - blown may ,
nor left one honey drop to shed
to cast the coming years of joy away ;
in rávaṇ ’s ear the demons ’ fate :
a thousand graces which shall thus be thine ;
o my friend , o my love !
haunted the bubbling springs and gliding streams ;
come closer , kind , white , long - familiar friend ,
both , if it may be ; so we best may hope
but all was filled with arrows rained
where to the pole the boreal mountains run ,
mock the harsh rattle of a man who lies
and goth to bedde to this knyht .
and of steel the rods and pickets ,
why did a cruel heaven
with seeking ; her smooth , sudden breasts
laughed kit , " unless it chewed the fern seed , too ,
( tho ' her mother lamented his taste ) ,
fond fancy for aye will be flitting away--
with great beaks .
love very lightly now , in self - defence .
death into this world was sent ,
and there beside the thorn she sits
but now her boat was anchored to a tree
and each well worthy of a royal bed :
echo with a thousand songs ;
and so farewell i bid her .
she sits in an armchair under the shaded porch of the farmhouse ,
and make the loveliest of them all my own .
save only in himself
on vimy , born anew !
less thoughtful did she see him , in his eyes
but still , oh so still
before the spiritual court , by nuptial bonds ,
a slave , too happy and too crazed to rule ,
of tears the mother wept .
i wept in deep despair ;
was all the one that fell .
broken , or in high heaven new laws ordain'd ,
with fainting knees shall labour in the course ,
an inner spirit also made
he knew not that the chieftain lay
and all the daffodils
" stemmed before were greater torrents ,
a face !
my soul stood trembling on the brink of life,--
and that , with paddle or fin or pinion ,
now with his herbs the steely head to tear
filling all the land with plenty .
and hurled hot curses at me as i sped ;
* page 14.*--l . 9 . * dada * . occasionally the old spanish participle
the towers halt like a broken prayer ;
to force the goddess , and to rival jove .
went in love 's sweet derangement--
treble and tenor and bass ,
thy name the honour in my verse to live .
close enough to prison a flame red bird .
good admiral , put about !   o spain , dear spain ! ' --
your gown shall be stitched ere the old moon fade :
near to the wishes of his heart :
not from what you have discovered ,
when the day dies .
let us do or die !
in all the splendour fortune can bestow ?
penthesileia battle - revelling ,
her poverty , as best she may , retrieves ,
only fear
he saw that flood of burning tears ,
from europe 's shores to find this blest abode ,
around and about me the corpses are lying ;
window , and huddle our tottering bodies on heavy
as they glide in the shadow and sheen .
as mine ; when i draw near , his eyes
full in the scaean gate , with loud commands ,
while the baby laughs in the hay ;
sharply pointed as a thorn ;
" so spake my fellow - voyager , her words
the poor man decks -- the sun delighteth
i grope along -- not desolate or sad ,
seventeenth century , the _ arte mayor _ verse was out of
wherein your father flourish'd , yet by you ,
cur , scyphe , te , dixit , gusto supervacuum ?
and each one seems so anxious at the heart
genius into ill health . prince athanase is
serpent , or lion , hid their savage brood ,
like menelous , is strong and bold :
through the housetops , casements , and eaves ,
supremacy between the two grand elements of our language ,
the gem that sparkled in her zone ,
ilmarinen , little heeding ,
for hast to lepe a borde many bruse theyr shynnys
mine uncle , on his bowling - green ,
honour and glory in the eyes of greece ;
behind whose grimy skin and matted hair
did any here molest us , / to etzel would the thing be told . "
litora lata sonant .
to my father , _ who , in his long life , has seldom been conscious
and gave a doleful groan thro ' yarrow .
a little water can not purge thy stain ;
her sacrifice is found without an heart .
" goe numbers boldly passe , stay not for ayde
" nor strength , nor speed , eludes their rage .
the blood of brave men tinges
till thou hast some little wisdom
for more than once in the land of time
persons of no every - day powers and acquirements , who had read the
and troilus , of whom ye nil han routhe ,
roses may forget their sun ,
that after this , whan men it hiere ,
of one another 's eyes .
there was a loud quarrel , world - wide .
of freedom from his forehead down ,
back to the city while the trumpets blared .
it is not strange that he did it ,
and , marking me a stranger , they drew from me
not to me , not to me ,
there with his boat was the master , already a little impatient
" wait ! you vile plish ! " peter holloos ,
i am yseult and helen , i have seen
aeuro ~ desoneaesaes , haue good day !
i heard the shingle grinding in the surge ,
if blood be the price of admiralty ,
in issuing forth out of the night profound ,
illumes the drear and misty way ! "
pleasure received from the drawings of flowers finely
go , lovely rose !
" the widow 's shield , the orphan 's stay . "
my little april lady ,
let the willing loom be worthy ,
wheeling flapped his wings above them .
which leads her to the war ; and from the war
yet one rude wind or ruffling shower
swift flew antilochus as flies the hound
as volatile as a bubble and as weak ,
lxxxvii . agylla was the original name of caere .
the babe just born in bethlehem
and tell your cedar floor .
he bawls for a physician .
or sit in shaded rooms afraid to face the light ;
he loste.aeuro(tm )
wove in fabric strong and useful ,
the very tongue , whose keen reproof before
for your unsatiated thirsts and anguished sighs ,
the politicians give me notice now
and laid it level with his eyes ,
" he vaunts the honours of his arms abroad ,
yet keep calm footing all the time
the simple , silent , selfless man
the bolt , obedient to the silken cord ,
reverberations of mortality :
his countenance a billow ,
" this is the song of billy jones ,
with mutual pleasure each on other gaz'd ,
this is the buyer of the blade -- be afraid !
for whiche unto your mercie thus i crye ,
and the faireste forth withal ,
the nurse , with transport uncontrolled ,
it never through my mind had past
in the pulpit - glimmer .
but archly,--
if she will but teach us the way ,
to flow towards the sea , as we could deny thee thy request . "
sheep and shepherds , trees and crooks
more real happiness i deem
for e'en and morn she cries , ' alas ! '
" but because haply some one may pretend
sir _ jeffery _ now began to droop ,
thee only of all ; yet can no memory say
odorous with syrian galbanum and smeared with
all into the air have risen
then right or wrong , a -- revolution !
heartily he endeavoured that everyone might , according to their
from this wild bitter root of violent lust and greed
in this season of glad respite ;
the captive maids there tempt the raging tide ,
with their hymns of lofty cheer .
with heart - sick weariness ,
enthusiasts , which spring up under the wings of the best and most
heaven ne'er above more innocence possessed ,
and heartache to flatter her .
moves as the music leads ;
that the taunts i hear be silenced :   i am stung with their
and then he made a second gift ,
white - stoled priest , and dark - browed slave,--
but can not play them , borrows a friend 's hand
when gushing notes from song - birds ' throats
of life , i to the palace made resort ;
and shadows fail into the past ;
high in mid air above the haunts of men ,
and some o ' it 's gay , but the maist o ' it 's sad .
that sign ,
his breast with these , and such like doctrines fill'd ,
bear away the pictured cover .
what is there yonder that makes me afraid?--
o south , with all thy palms !
a tide of blood sends pulsing , welling ,
thus then thought he ;
with the tall cranes hoisting out the freight .
this clerk , myself , and my good neighbour alse ,
from stall and workshop gathered !
seems but an echo of his song .
buds , which the breath of summer days
the name , my lord , as pleases thee . ”
and for thy pain and dole
to climb the heavens wherein she moved ,
the hidden depths of many a heart .
the lichens cling the closer with the years ,
with haggard eyes the poet stood ;
two of far nobler shape , erect and tall ,
as you journey along to bumpville .
which such a happy likeness seem'd to bear ,
whose spleen e'en worse than burns ' venom when
ceased all on tremble :   piteous was the cry :
time - past so fragrant , sickly now _ call'd _ in
winnows the buxom air ; till within soare
what wonder modes in wit should take their turn ?
the rougher voices of the toiling men
to fire the cover'd ships ; the flames they fear
then tied him fast upon a cart ,
the care of that to which a million worlds .
in ivy foliage ; and astonish'd leads
" he _ et super _ with us last evening , and is a terrible fellow . he
to him that overcometh shall be given
you 'd find a richer maiden ,
that cumber them too--
" within the house of being ,
as it is in the bokes write ,
of his great grandmother{26 } with steele to wound ,
all young gallant heroes brave .
two thousand crowns in gold .
in wait for me ,
plaining in vain unto the moon ;
the fair white rose has faded
penelope _ to _ ulysses .
and wish you health , and love , and mirth ,
with both hands his face he covered ,
unselfish , kind and true .
brows , and breast , and lips , and language of sweet strains ,
his love was there before him
is vague with haw - trees as a ridge with mist ,
“ not criminal : our fate , though much bemoan'd ,
plenteous store , bread and sweet wine , and she clad me in
to be the wonder of the countryside .
and now he looked up at the sails ,
that doth not quaver like the joys of sense :
long'd itself out of the din ,
you fold your sorrow from his happy eyes--
understanding of the reader must necessarily be in some degree
behind suborned battalions , ranked as wheat
thousands of seraphim singing together , and me just flying
i would mistake , and doubt my own voice sounding ,
but now my kings are gone from me ,
takin ' all of his nasty bumps ;
as many as you will .
till hurtling down there falls one mad black hammer - blow :
ten trenches , in its hollow bottom sunk .
each will answer , short and sure ,
he turned him now from teviotside ,
this love than love more deep ,
are but as measures
and fear came o'er me .   as with circling round
this raging heat has kindled in thy breast .
why sleepst thou eve ? now is the pleasant time ,
with lantern and with ladder he comes posting up the street .
the sun , above the mountain 's head ,
have upon every hardest matter wrought :
from far , or from their isle 's vicinity ,
then sit thou safely on my knee ;
ship on ship draws near
" what tempests gloomed the by - past year-- "
if she wh - e mair !
to a blonde alsatian cook ,
i say : " let dat liddle be ' doggone ' strong !
in an earthly paradise ,
love and joy part ;
hurled downward from the glorious sky .
and i blushed for the world we 'd made ,
thus is th ' acclivity reliev'd , which here
so rich as these no souldiers were before ;
i give you this , the bitter and the sweet .
wore the long winter out ;
we dropped the seed o'er hill and plain ,
with a quick change of tone ,
whose very life - blood ' twas to bless ,
_ he _ knows about it all -- he knows -- he knows !
there he found the smooth - skinned powan .
think each in each , immediately wise ;
the shepherd threw his hook and tottered past ;
and the same shadow veils the sun ....
happy - hearted are the matrons
speckled salmon leap from the womb
' 1 have done ill , ' than to redeem his pledge
perhaps , then , he would guess -- perhaps he would n't .
there stands a town , not high advanced in fame ;
our eyes are glad with radiant italy !
go reap the life
her unanointed forehead
and that ’s the call to me most crying . ”
and all the air was ringing with the merry bo'sun 's singing ,
i fear that we shall find the stripling dead . "
" i know not , " said the minstrel , " what now can keep them back ;
when , dreamland still bewildering mine eyes ,
" are they roads yonder ? " said skim , sitting under the laurels .
beholding beauty , should go mad
looked upward , and blest the pure ray , ere it fled .
be robbed to ransom me ! "
he would not do it ! her sweet face and faith
santa 's schooner 's lost a sail ,
repairing where he judg'd them prostrate fell
all we yet see are glimpses , now and then ,
and why you do n't begin !
one dream my lute could still reveal,--
as black just as pitch was the sky ,
and fling to the ordures thine immortal soul ?
he his arms resistless threw round trony 's knight .
tras ese monte azul , cuya alta cumbre
it once was bright and clear as thine ,
o , happy night , deliver
in peace shall land thee at thy native home . "
this chamber for example -- turn your head--
one after one by the horned moon
what makes the ocean tides to rise and fall ,
then toward my chamber turning , for my wonted slumber yearning ,
wearing a sort of superior frown ;
o for one moment 's look into thine eyes ,
was at easter - tide put on .
was positive his gait was anything but steady -- that
wheþer wel nygh[t ] now i con bygy{n}ne ,
or haply it a sister may have been ,
he hews with his axe at the mast ,
if the thief proffer piece of bread or bone ,
with sacrosanct cajoleries
of all my kingdom , i will give it thee ,
my day or night myself i make
deep ?
fond man !   they are not haughty , are not tender ;
the evening he was worse , but had no increase of temperature , no
( ' orse - gunners , listen to my song ! )
their sturdy youngsters number two or three ;
sing hi ! the hawthorn pink and pale !
for navigation were reknown'd as much
voice ( _ from below _ )
from which the breakers ran like ghosts , moaning and tumbling .
and truth is one whose ways are meek
while now , as terror wak'd thy boding fears ,
bugle and battle - drum
until , at last , i 'd have to steal
the utterless awe , the joy akin to anguish ,
her waist was circled with a zone of gold .
beheld awake his very dream : the gods
ah , dared i clasp him ,
heigh ho , chil love no more .
o logan , sweetly didst thou glide .
with clamor .   downward from his mountain gorge
ne scholde have mad hir half so blythe :
since from amid the well - spring of delights
of voices loved so long ago .
aspect , vanquishing me with the light of a smile , she said to
and still , behind me -- hieroglyph obscure
to think that in that bloody tide
hastened on to do his mission ;
the awfulness of silence ached
-- he and those followers that with him remained --
with all most beautiful in heart and frame ;
so , to return .   as i said before ,
not otherwise could this our meeting be .
the picture must _ in statu quo _
  pope 's poetical works , ed . elwin , vol . i. p. 9 .
soon when the bands in lucid rows assemble ,
thou of death must deem
but from the queen turned not his face away ,
reason in nature 's lotus drench'd--
lurks in each weather now .
keep thou this my graven sigh ,
he knows i love him well ,
when your great ones depart , will ye say :
and share the spoils of conquest,--thou hast seen
they neither need nor know in these grim days .
within his bending sickle 's compass come ;
do i question if my life
shot with opal ,
of fancy , reason , virtue , nought can me bereave .
swept the foundation , and the level bank
spake the ancient wainamoinen :
do you remember all the tales
by care and pain oppressed ;
thirteen hundred and seventy - six : "
“ the pregnant mother , should not rack her more :
what hast thou seen , o wind ,
health bloom'd on every face , and all was gay--
upon the floor ; and sleeping there he lay ,
save her or fail , there was conscience always .
prohibits to dull life in this our state[lf ]
_ not for our friendship , or for hope of gaine
and shrines , to suit the holy shade ,
for those first tiny , prayerful - folded hands
save at the cross ' tis learnt by me .
govern thy heart ! constrain th ' entangled sense !
thy bosom , and this glorie next to thee
und aus tollem prahlen in die tiefen fluten
to such extent , that its circumference
and all that they demand me , i ready am to do . "
in fortune , fashion , rank , conspicuous shone ,
we , fearing instant death , within the barks
they can not , can not know .
the conquest , great euryalus , is thine .
que busca en vano aquí su bien perdido .
artifice of minor epic . his catalog of the senses ( stanzas 75 - 79 )
scarce showed the gloomy splendour there .
and when to reap , and when to sow the grain ?
prop me upon the pillows once again--
someone had literally run to earth
when upon a merry evening ,
and bade the draw - bridge warden loose the chains ,
from thought to thought the sarzan 's fancy flies ,
what reeks it them ?   what need they ?   they are sped ;
that shall behold them rise , erect and free
of measure without bound ;
and he who sets himself to go beyond ,
how shall we grasp , shall we grasp what still is ours ?
the thrilling bonds of love increase ;
and set a bowl upon the step ;
still we have time to reach the cavern of thine azure home . '
und he dat trinks in munich ,
sweet , sumptuous fables of baghdad
we , full of joy , obey him with one mind ;
and flames , unpent by self 's mean thrall ,
do they come back to you ?
since i can not have thine ;
it ’s playing it low on william ,
their lily faces brightened fast
this wicked world , " in any sermon .
there in your teeth much leprosy .
in the star lit realms of space
and here it was -- between the goals
can , nor before , nor with thy life expire .
and as for our corporation,--shocking
remains , they clasp and cherish in their arms
her wearied limbs together , and , ere she knew ,
alter now his shape completely ,
' tis equal to a wonder done ,
and the friend of perch and salmon ;
like young lycaon , of the royal line ,
from thee the vision and the sorrow--
an ' there be happy .
from some rare flower ,
or , like the sons of vulcan , vomit smoke ,
and the kind old saint with his gown and his hood
it was a race , for lover an ' for son ;
turn , turn , my wheel !   this earthen jar
always happy when i see a nation enjoying itself ,
let him join that foe 's service , accursed and abhorred
and troops of ants , flowing in noiseless train ,
no farther wrong , no farther woe
for it is the source of youthful joy ; it burns like fire ,
she stood beside him , and address'd him thus :
for you , for you were all the tapers lighted ,
what sacred paths ye've trod--
that ye should sit forlorn ,
the subway in the distance
his eyes half - closed ,
of each misgave him through his dream , and i
and may absolve you freely of your sin . "
then did the royal siegfried / summon his good knights to hand .
from out their number , some were set apart
waters of the river styx . and now jove hates me , while he lets
o let your spirit still my bosom soothe ,
seiz'd on each arm ( while deep in either cheek
all was but a trifle , that by the rest was done ,
the miserable sentence , and the word
but god is god , my darling ,
revealing to her son the mind of jove ;
for there wert thou , sharer of all his griefs ,
do n't you s'pose ?   or moth - eaten , p'raps ;
atrides mark’d him where sublime he stood ;
all my joys my hope excel ,
the song of triumph now i seem to hear ,
seseque ei perire mauolunt ibidem
while into the turgid heart of the fens at their feet
on noble priam , and on priam 's sons .
we were faint - hearted .   honor was full - valiant .
must set a lock upon his lips ,
" he is better , " saith the priest ;
( so heaven ordains it ) on the destined wall .
from her blue - eyes bitter tear - drops ,
till all my human hungers are fulfilled ,
lock horns above a blue abyss ,
beaued her around one winter , and , first thing i knew ,
the organ with the organ man
long expected and awaited ,
how memory pains ! let some gay theme beguile
maria was a careless child ,
to store the acid rinsings , thin and flat ,
high , pale , and sculptural his brow ,
and all the crowd in village streets , stand still ,
deficient , ere the full - form'd horns could meet
defeat whets victory , they say ;
found no white girl 's shoes or clothing ,
whose heart tho ' it long ago died
whose valour in the conflict shown
stood moaning forth her sad complaint ,
through earth and heaven forever rolls .
except with a little imperative squeak ,
as custom hath it ; you to right ,
he lowly to the altar bows ;
by many a tender word delayed ,
in the other little light serenely smiles
for minstrel songs a beauteous dame would pout .
i do n't object to ' er , for all ' er sighs ;
then begins he swiftly rowing
of circe , my ææan monitress ,
wronged and ashamed thy sister dies .
who there like a cat is roaming
as the old gran'-jury room
orpheus is in the midst , whose magic song
the sweet refreshing , of that heav'nly shower .
to the will of the magician .
that held a dummy coffin . stranger still
the chosen sentencers ; they fairly heard
you said , when the war was over ,
but the sound of muffled drum !
all intellect , all sense , and as they please ,
sont solides et sont ardents
the dread o ' doom has grippit me .
guided by birds and flowers ,
and honors without end
is this then all of what was once my child ?
( the cove be'ind the sandbags ai n't a death - or - glory cuss ) .
that sparkled on the yellow field ,
when fortune 's storms assail this weary head ,
and once a week a plenteous board she kept .
they trail behind her up the floor ,
within a cold straight house shalt lie .
they gathered some ; the violet , pallid blew ,
' twixt feltro and feltro shall his nation be ;
yea , she clung close to me that hour
as from my soul , which in thy breast doth lie :
and when harvest time was over ,
as they romp shrilly .
that ' well they thrive ; ' and that ' no second such
what mean you ?
injury is the end ; and all such end
but my vengeance shall attain you ! "
tell me , tell me , wandering winds ,
he woke , he leapt from bed , he ran and lookt ,
there was a little man ,
till dies the amber dew
i 'll ask a little bluebird
  " an ingenious device of my learned friend . "--bob 's _ letter to
not for him an earthly crown
see the mountains kiss high heaven
but let me quit the theme ; as such things claim
it viewed the wondrous beauty virgins have ,
" thus oftentimes that shameless woman prest
“ nor should i fear , even were this crime , i share
together through the world they rove ;
shall ' scape of all the suitors , whose delight
for , ráma forced from home to fly ,
beginning doubtfully and far away ,
acabó una vieja
here 's a rhyme for smiling ted ,
and pushed him from the step i sat on .
i have to do a deal of tacking .
with their comely blue aprons and caps white as snow ,
excites desire with spilth of nard .
and all the pain thereof ,
treading low gently , clad in greyish white ,
to think upon her sorrows , but her joys
briefly of the ancient village .
inflicts the deep wound nothing earthly can heal .
rallying they turn'd , and fac'd again the greeks :
" that swept athwart the cold and pitiless sky ,
nailed close to feel the baking of the sun
where there are people in a like dispute ;
this silver - tissued network
forbidden further travel .   as the goats ,
while charles elsewhere anther duty stays ,
was none . she burnt , she lov'd the tyranny ,
so feelingly , each argument beside
but , awed by gage , his bursting wrath recoiled ,
what i should call her in my lay ;
the steerage of the realm gave way .
imbrown'd with shadows , from their toils releas'd
to some unknown and distant clime .
against the chimer here stoutly must he fight ,
we walk and whisper awhile ,
on its quaint and battered face
he smiled about him from his horse .
now the last day of many days
no more subjecting mortals who have learnt
and anoint therewith the ears of thy company , lest any of
with my little dish .
see marks of fury in thy face ;
on the frontier hurl their desperate masses :
when she 's spoke to , as if she 's afraid .
not the fellers thet sent him , but them on the fence,--
doctor ! that same specific yesterday
and from the royal palace strode
the timid lips have stammeringly expressed,--
a maiden sat on th ' ocean shore ,
thi aarle on morgenen
could raphael or leonardo trace .
" ' no mercy obtains in the tempests that rave ,
snatched his broadsword from the rafters ,
twelve steeds strong - limb'd , victorious in the race ;
sometimes his spine remained all stripped of skin .
with swift mysterious smiles
of friends and kindred , have left the biers
that thou wert wasting all thy life in woe
if it ripens like red wine ?
" ca n't you agree ?
apart awhile , then took her lover 's hand ,
such honors to thee as my numbers may ;
to a keen whirl of passion and avidity ,
accepted his peace - offering , and rejoiced .
her eye intent on all the mazy plan ,
in her hand she held a wool - box ,
that here beside me thus is scintillating ,
" than moving apes , are demigods to me !
with wonder to behold how rapidly this sentiment is losing
through porton village , under the bridge ,
and you will come to a wilderness
like a little white panic
hup then the lady jumped hoff the bench she sat from ,
he saved others and himself did save .
a mother feels , whose child is lying ill ,
of the prince foretold in the prophecy .
from an anabaptist and a presbyter man ,
if he wo n't take his hen , why the man is a goose :
seems as if my heart would break ,
at play , on a plateau 's breast , content .
with flowers plumed ) the swelling and subsiding
but there were three chairs
smell where your soft foot treads ;
what is the garb they wear , tattered and sumptuous ,
but while they thus so widely wander ,
ah , hast thou seen how very dear ?
loses her all , has nothing left ;
with light from " over the river , "
still for the world through the ages
that while the world is hushed so deep ,
rain had fallen the whole damned night .
evening star .
nor comb'd with art her tresses seem'd ; full plain ,
had shown me , when i slept the evil sleep ,
lightly this little herald flew aloft ,
and there , while the ship rolls , boldly to sit
willingly i would relate here ,
who kisses first and then presents the bill .
who fears not god .   charon , demoniac form ,
i rede , as the cronique seith ,
and in sandy places heather ;
these shone in the sky , and the pail by the wall
no sooner is the friendly greeting ended ,
were it a cross
none but his steel approach them .   what is weak ,
if i that swete lusti wif
it was as though he slept , and sleeping dreamed ,
hardly at all during those many suns
soon as my peace i held , compass'd me thrice
o you , your own best darts ,
soon as the rage of hunger was suppress’d ,
gave her poor joey 's bed , and joey 's dinner .
a day of woe to all the pygmy - race ,
buy terms divine in selling hours of dross ;
the drunkard 's funeral
and the empty dreams were wide ,
mocking the sunshine in their glittering wings ,
we did not mind , we went one way ,
so withering!--i feel it now--
that albion , to that fire too nigh ,
a mere artificer .
to burn the dead ; hereafter we may fight
while they adore me on the throne of hell ,
then went i home to a restless bed .
as it lieth beneath the tree ;
hast thou the potion and magic lotion
at the beginning of the seventh line the word filled is weak and
violets in clumps from hills ,
he flies in high circles an ' chooses meat
and no man left a watch on them to keepe ,
one cloud o'erhead spread a vast wing
with this message to imoski 's cadi :
eyes of small birds , and insects small ;
i would have read , or drawn , instead ,
blesses you , o little flies
the zhederrill peers from his watery mine
the artist who this viol wrought
on avon 's bank , where flowers eternal blow ,
phoebus , and thou diana , sovereign of the woods , ye illustrious
and sorrows such as moved both earth and heaven ;
that we will keep the faith for which they died .
their breathing not so ... free ,
to know his brother taken cut him to the heart .
no singing milkmaids ( save in books )
there we might wander , you and i alone ,
of the bounding thing as we onward go--
and flung his useless pen into the sea .
shadows hold their breath ;
means ; there is witchcraft in it .
and nevermore darken my doors again ! '
grew colder , and my perfect form was changed .
far away my heart is roaming ,
here break we off , at this unhallowed name .
though they bloom and look gay like the rose ;
the purple petals , fallen in the pool ,
" it 's easy to bid one rack one 's brain--
i was proud with the sense of my might and power
the world fell so that ilke tide ,
he manfully answered , " let _ us _ build the shrines ,
squanders the staircase in flowers and green .
the heart ; ' tis strange how quick the feeling grows ;
by turns in every bone .
much danger , long and mighty toils he bore ,
his eyes
he sits beneath his jasmined porch ,
and the blest dispensations of providence praised ,
you may practise upon rabbits ,
himself , the old school - boy friend .
alone the fire , when frost - winds sere
where john , by roger 's brick - bat , chance'd to fall ,
spread them wide on the cold earth ,
but whither had flown the ancient wrong ;
was it the wailing bird of the gloom ,
--then while time serves , and we are but decaying ,
their good will doth hide their failings .
in the land of a strange , outlandish tongue
he lives not in ancestral hall ,
and at last to the council of the realm
all common things , each day 's events ,
fresh polished with dry pumice stone ,
ostia munita est ; idem loca navibu ' pulchris
the cries and mad alarms
by my will without bits directing
of a promise of marriage and action for breach .
then he sprang from the chariot on to the ground and said , " sir ,
the thundering line of battle stands ,
that english wise men led unto the shore
dear eyes , good - night ,
something sow - like before me gnashed its teeth ,
when , to your spirit 's sick alarm ,
so was th ' assembly stirr'd ; and tow'rd the ships
it 's now twa month that i 'm your debtor ,
of hem was tho the grete fame .
joining rough hands,--ere the meal was o'er:--
to thee ; for she is mortal , deathless thou
the stedfast empyrean shook throughout ,
that ache in a sun - baked land ,
hail ! herring , hail !
this morning , full of breezes and perfume ,
his lattice open toward his darling west ,
neither are the windows joyful ,
or between the teeth of lake - pike . "
resting his foot upon a stool the while :
and rears the lofty alders from the ground .
that sun , which erst with love my bosom warm'd
his beard of snow
for , ere she died , a child was born;--
is storm , and tales of what your fathers were ,
the ballad of ' woodman , spare that tree ' ( which was received with
scatters his freshest , tenderest green .
it powders all the wood ,
since battle is renounced , thy thoughts employ
for all the boats were in demand ;
till a feeble cheer the dane
and dare ye fire another gun ,
i tell it , since by turpin it is told ,
would dip from the nearest slatestone ledge .
made his blood freeze with memories that lay
the wealthiest man in the township .
then i lay me down in wrath ;
who of all the host of heroes ?
that youth whereon your hopes were wo nt to feed ,
lights the air with a dusky glimmer
or amulets of pine .
larded with pearles , with diamonds enrold ;
loos'd from the car , and veil'd with clouds around .
their faiths upgrew unsuckled in it , fills
and john where flows the aisne ;
and i to him , " if it may be , i should like my eyes to have
a grain of sense , a grain of learning ;
the prows , their speed stopp'd , o'er the surges nod ,
in the stern rock supreme .
covered with blossoms o'er,--
stay , stay
as grandchild then to god your art is kin .
but whanever the end o ' my money they saw ,
be conceived by thee a man .
' how then ? who then ? ' a fury seized them all ,
to buy him a hat ,
why but to keep ye low and ignorant ,
marring the spirit i remembered once
but in the gorge by deadman 's gap the mountain shades were black ,
and ne'er gave trouble after ;
thy senses and thyself confine
by the dull throbbing of my heart ;
. . . when courted death shall claim my limbs and find them
permit me at a woman 's cost
am trublit now with gret seikness ,
i feel it ! strength is left me still .
understanding , there must be found , of necessity , an apparent
where all is still , and cold , and dead ,
to this dire gullet .   me the beastial life
anchises then a mighty bowl crowned with a garland fair ,
and some in fens conceal them ;
to punctuate the wall ,
his massive brain and princely bearing lent
when will he put his hands on my breasts ?
the grappling - hooks were brought at length ,
as if his wings contended with his sight .
and here what i now draw from the water , wading in the pondside ,
they hide themselves from mortal gaze .
go , lovely rose !
the slightest favour seems a crime ,
and from the orchard a voice echoes and echoes it over ;
in spells of mystery she has cast .
is heard the splash of the sturgeon 's leap ,
' tis from high life high characters are drawn ;
again the weather threaten'd,--again blew
with strange alarm .
at chaeroneia , fatal to liberty ,
the lightening spear : swept after him his host
by a jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg . he that hurled
and sat down beside her ,
and , to hear better her who comes , with bent
he has awaited me for countless ages , for love of me he has
his all thy future--
i hear the loom of the weaver that weaves the web of years .
the pleasaunce - walks , the weeping queen ,
are slain by hives and hecatombs ;
" and thus with thankful heart he closes you ;
and marking with new names the book of rome ,
it is but fortune 's accident
absence , he is now master of all he surveys .
so brightly shone , and with such radiance clear
my own , shine ever like a star
the whitest virtue strikes . what king so strong ,
and halloweth in the day with gifts , and , gazing eagerly
tho ' they come from the ends of the earth !
waters on a starry night
and some in the forest deeps of the west in their silence lie ,
my soul , delightless , a ' surveys ,
the spirits of may intervene ,
their bones were rattling in the cold
brave man is its flower and symbol , who
sweet jesus turned him around ,
" o have me commanded to your wife at home ; "
omnibus aerumnis adfecti denique uiuunt ,
which sang " rejoice , rejoice ! "
we tried in vain to understand ,
but grim starvation , at the board , presides
a stately thing to see .
what temples have been rent in twain ?
unto my leader , upon this turned round ;
but from my bed , i lifted up mine eyes
until we saw , blue - veiled and dim , or leaping like desire ,
with thy enchantment , melt me into tears .
june 's palace paved with gold ;
but still the spirits rose , and there
all goned afay mit de lager beer--
now that april 's there ,
sis quocumque tibi placet
beaming upon me , thus her words began :
yet who not listens , with delighted smile ,
" o father , may we think it then , that souls may get them hence
of the pure , naked , fruitful , awful morn .
without thy light what light remains in me ?
and washed amidst the tuscan stream the bulls iberia bred .
and the children all are dancing :
as easily as i could offer him
there 's virtue , the title it surely may claim ,
free yourselves from your own passions and insatiate
und glaubte schon mein sehnen haet ein end ;
on hides of beeves , before the palace gate
and i rejoice in my bonnie bell .
he sought his mother . she , intent to shun ,
sad was this voyage to the dame ;
how i wish that , before you set out ,
and the field echoes to the martial sound .
come and take him where he stays
and happy life , or at the worser end
frum idle gals , ' tis true ; "
out came the children running .
for the nights are long and lonely , and the days devoid of cheer .
all common things , each day 's events ,
but not a remedy .
_ the snow in the street and the wind on the door . _
little value do you place
at the trumpet of france ,
the grown - up annual , or the juvenile ,
well , let her go . i 've done my best . "
and then , our brains began to spin ;
whilst i sings _ about _ my song _ jes so _ .
with doubtful ears , and small unwashen
peace on earth but not of men ,
within me a new thought did entrance find ,
gli colombi adunati alla pastura ,
there 's a white , white grave lies under the graveyard trees ,
whom greater honours do not hurt .
long upon the mind of man ,
may reach , i hail'd with taunts the cyclops ' ear .
holding the watch , he spoke to her :
where soon -- ah , now , with cries
{ 199c }   the whole line may be thus translated ;
will neither die nor yield ?
there 's a grate in every chamber and a bath in every hall ,
an idle boy that sleeps in pleasure 's lap ;
his sword was hammering so fast ,
of all life 's ways than to be cursed
whom you have torn for yours .
i may not swerve
greeks who of old their brows with laurel decked .
nor the aspen lend assistance ,
mine own that bide upon me , all from me
( 11 ) in the senate , curio had proposed and carried a resolution
its vestments ' mongst the thorns -- for oft we see
“ beauty we grant . his beard to sprout began ,
and her woman 's soul . "
broccoli white , without a tarnish ;
and tried in vain with sword and steel to burst
so they issued forth , just thirty bandits ,
from stirling castle we had seen
the doctor said that death was but
happy the man , of mortals happiest he , 103 .
their lips were four red roses on a stalk
how stiff they are , too ! how straight and upright !
saying , " we see thee not , come to us , speak to us--
drink wine , and live here blitheful , while ye may :
great wonders of the warriors had oft been told before .
while the muse is on the wing ,
flowers--
fast vanished , internally mined .
be thou afraid , because these things i know ,
to guide the footsteps of the wise ,
that , lending to the world inanimate
so long as men can breathe , or eyes can see ,
still he did not leave his laughing ,
the thick sobs choking in his breast ,
one single vein he had , which running down
for thy consid'ring .   at this point , more wise ,
ploffskin , pluffskin , pelican jee !
a challenge to the gathering storm . " _               _ 40 _
and preiden for this lordes hele ,
amateurish bit of verse , enclosed to me in a letter by
i took but ane o ' her comely cheek ;
fly away , fly away , breath ;
no one heeds .
in ambient air , then melt , and disappear .
one from the cold black water -- new - made gold
quinque tenent caelum zonae , etc . ,--
called magnetism , lacking better word ,
along the far sea - isles aglow ;
has reasoned to the mighty universe .
rail me then , on my decease ,
and st . helena.--one far in the north
winter 's bee - thronged ivy - bloom .
could find no words to waste ;
but it 's shoot , shoot , shoot ,
till time 's revenges break their seals away ,
this the answer of his tribe - folk :
thus breathing death , in terrible array ,
yet i remain alone .
arms to which men will never more resort ,
the waters flow , the landscape dim
surged in triumph , and fell , and ebbed again into silence .
men looked to see his bitter sword
so stooping down , as needs he must
whose crimson roses burst his frost ,
ulysses , and his brave maternal race ,
had often bathed his brow with light .
in thy grim cell would lay their dust .
all hail to thee , child jesus !
judges you justly when it seems aware
will thine angels , singing hosanna , make sacrifice to thee , so
and o'er and o'er the sand ,
where grows?--where grows it not ?   if vain our toil ,
and that soul is god .
whose approbation -- prosper even mine .
then , as the mighty cauldron hissed ,
who could pay me , in person or pelf ,
more natural to connect the name of these verses , which
to hang upon a gallow
dearer markets cheap ones bleed . '
but now his day was o'er ; his work was done .
( fly away , my heart , fly away )
her leaves upon her breast ;
it comes unbidden , comes unbought ,
on every side he pried here and there ,
ye won!--the emperor for this ill fate
of him , who yet was gazing on his wound ,
through green leaves lift their walls of grey ;
henceforth to me be dead : depart ,
say , virgins , seated round the throne divine ,
to sow a jangling noise of words unknown :
your farewell ! you go !
and greater glory varying to and fro ,
we can but see the swift flash of the goal ;
within god 's acre where our fathers sleep ,
teach me half the gladness
chris'mas mornin ' when they 've got new sleds an ' ' garlands of
from the blind shell , wakes ,
and all the warrior fleid .
_ and show'd him many sights , that courage cold could rear _ .
o gracious ruler , let thy reign endure ;
to put hire in hir fader grace ,
in roasting and boiling , for taste and delight ;
london   new york   montreal
a prayer whose theme is -- peace .
she sings thy tears asleep , and dips
there the shrill jay alights his plumes to dress ;
but he never flunked , and he never lied ;
and morning light but brings th ' unwinking sun ,
and twin - like truth and fondness lies
with thy vain art ;
" o yes , o yes , " cries the proud young porter ,
the everlasting groan of hell 's despite .
ere the afternoon was born
any more , any more , any more , never more ! "
conjure a heart into the trebly felled .
the room he stood in was an ancient hall .
and she whom i held is as though she were not ,
quick , as it fell , from the broken staff
the windows were left open wide ;
sitting beneath the olive , valiant still ,
while the unitarian brother , as he walks the village streets ,
till i had entered , was it downward weighed .
a collection of
that recks not any strife nor any hour ,
de quantos es conoscida
into the country far away ,
their feet and of the trunk all else concealed ,
i had no words for it , except
breathing songs of low compassion
now , cooing like a woodland dove ;
dialect has been retained . printer 's errors and corrections are
that takes the boist'rous weather and feels it kind :
which having been must ever be ;
pompeie sih his pacience
and to the hus - ting held at mere
betaketh hire the see to kepe .
be what thy beauties , not our blots , have made thee ;
darted then the daring whiting ,
i felt no whit abashed or shy--
and the men run hither , thither
for , why should men or angels name
had been so much unstableness ?
but in the meane tyme here shalt thou haue discorde
for i dream her coming--
but following wits from that intention strayed ,
back to his book then : deeper drooped his head :
_ i speak my private , but impartial sense ,
over the surface of a dark pool .
and broil two portions of their choicest meat .
and balanc'd strife , where many a warrior fell ,
by which such bliss is given ;
and beneath the starry flag
and saw the fearful shadow of death 's wing
and as if she saw her murderer glare
ipse suo flueret bacchus pede mellaque lentis
and with the savage of the desert howl .
when he went blundering back to god ,
of all our ills ! i was a happy bride
my love and i , my merry love and i.
of immortality.--and did he rise ?
o children of banishment ,
froward and fretful ,
" and a white wheaten loaf;--
materiam morti luxuriemque dabunt ;
with their sagas of the seas ;
fragment.--the wren 's nest
ten thousand broken hearts may soon be found
he that loves a rosy cheek ,
and the breathing of the flowers .
to misers ' habits did incline ;
each full of courage , strength , and beauty ,
rebukes .   i deserve your censure , but i ca n't stand it
when robin came to nottingham ,
who had nothing to eat but a carrot ,
when thro the water they had gane .
wisht i he d you home with me !
if your name is absent from the rolls of the red terrace ,
and would fain on the world his eyes close .
the cry draws nearer though distant still ,
proclaiming " peace on earth , good will to men . "
a dreaming sculptor , in passing by ,
shine , twin stars above the storm - drifts piled ,
and winding ways of covert fantasy ,
yet she looked wondrous fair .
he had resolved he never should return .
i _ can _ write poetry -- good enough
then spoke with a complacent smile .
graceful as a fawn could be .
but word is gane to the land - sergeant ,
flag of the brave ! thy folds shall fly ,
the loyal sun will melt them all away .
her so :
to give just judgment in the warriors ' strife .
if he but speak his mind .
calderón used it in the _ viña del señor _ :
o flower of all the years , o flower of all ,
my more distant way .
sylvia , for all the pangs you see
unable to utter a sound .
this raised the gorge of lucifer . with one deep " bah , "
he spoke : obedient to the eye
singing round the root now . "
thereupon the northland hostess
took the arguments of the second and third satires ; but he
for ills or accidents that chance to all .
she said , ' now kiss me and be going ,
with - outen part of elles - where servyse ,
the cuckoo , and " the busy bee , "
that from the generating heart proceeds ,
where others have no grief
that admiral hath great possessions ;
with bad companions you 'll consort
his pupils , deep in scripture ’s page ,
that gars him gang till her ,
others , and easily distinguished by the glossiness of its
well do i know thy arts , thy wiles--
with little playmates , to and fro ,
i , who am housed worse than the galley slave ;
such noise as i can make to be heard farthest
sometimes come unsought temptations .
both thou and i , thus doing , when at first
who slowly paced among the slumbering host ,
oh , i know i 'm a hideous sight ,
eager , excited , but mouse - still ,
and flapped its wings in the gables ,
man with the kingly face ,
to guard their dearest ever ,
and then i whispered : " here , lie low unseen and live
believe me or doubt me , i dinna care whilk , vol . ii . , 108 .
" your armour gude ye maunna shaw ,
though gay , yet innocent of worse intent ,
his ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps .
and every feeling of the christian heart
“ o sore would the thirst be , o signild , full sore ,
screen'd by deep boughs on either hand ;
to get what must be lost again .
william roscoe . _ to my books on parting with them _
xxxiii    the swing
its hallow'd numbers , in the realms of bliss
he gives command to " curb the fiery steed ,
of iser , rolling rapidly .
so spake he words of cheer : the godlike kings
and that they deemed by sundry signs and shows
why wish the fleeting years to stay?--
give back the upward looking and the light ;
i can not ! no ! i can not !
but like a beast whose eyeballs burned .
which ever just beyond my reach did gleam ,
he carries with so home a thrust , as rives
fear not but he will show it !
the gate opposed pellucid valves adorn ,
other pictures dark and strange ;
where he passed , the branches moved not ,
" let not the people be too swift to judge ,
recur each year for several years , can any
" if these means be inefficient ,
the pater seemed unable to decide ,
lies all that golden hair undimmed in death .
so free from danger , free from fear ,
while the sachet begs for freedom , and the musk , revolting , yells
afar from the bank ,
woe 's me , i shall be lonely
just to recollect his love ,
all is not lost -- the unconquerable will ,
' aeneas should be summoned , ' one and all,--
and , without asking , _ whither _ hurried hence !
the light of the folds of whose standard
such was his hope;--that hope to realize
the trees all fled up towards the moon
he smote the web like bolt of fate .
heart , ear , and eye , and everything
horrible monster ! hated by gods and men ,
where kewstoke seems to creep into the sea ,
' you know how once in london
have this for seal to undeceive men known .
from their large victorious eyes
himselfe had cloathed like a gentleman ,
like -- like -- oh , where 's a pretty simile ?
on whom volker and hagen / did soon in fury fall ,
to hold the liquor that she loved , and keep it safe and sound .
which , sacred to the lord of flame ,
while tender mists do blind us ,
whoever earned his share
the nine white muse - brows . for this counterpart , ...
veiling all that may befall
who stood against the mountains .
to live at liberty !
porque es despertar la dama
yet still we vaunt us of our mighty mind
and where is every one he printed
but , as over the ocean - sea we swept ,
o pansy - violet ,
but though from court to cottage he depart ,
exultation is the going
at her fine place in devonshire ;
“ were thine of female mould , ) amaz'd he look'd
lies mangled throu'ther ,
hubs!--the second follows suit ;
hence then ; to argos shall the maid retire ,
banish or bind me , i can be nowhere
are all in company--
a adver_tise_ment , anyhow ,
yet if all these do not move him ,
as to the tune--"my joe " !
the ashes of a bad cigar .
" long time he , gazing , stood ;
of the thumbscrew would not prove that earth revolved .
man reißt und schleppt sie vor den richter ,
and such as my best judgment could select
scattered , ill - counselled , blinded :   for a proof ,
she said , and turn'd away her piercing glance :
on their career -- and this resulted :
suppliant implor'd , " this macerated flesh .
come -- take ye food ; drink wine ; and on the shore
where paradise imperishably smiles .
keep the free heart from its own hands ?
to the light
nor yet had he arrived but for the oar ,
hasten to the rooms for grinding .
assists me here ) compare it to the moon ;
while yet they wake , an ill death shalt thou meet ,
instead of great .
þat of no diete þat day þe deuel haf , he roȝt ;
the moaning and groaning ,
were all for battle bound ,
and left the glorious weapon there
that passes on my future days have spoken ?
what means thy ling'ring in the libyan land ?
i have driven the faint - heart rains ahead
when she heard that the master had had a bad fall
_ " from his honoured friend , william davenant " _
then our nurst hopes , anticipating , bring
two friends she saw approaching to seek and mourn the slain ,
but vengeance gathers man with man .
of the minutest cricket ,
till the little ones , weary ,
see yonder pawkie shepherd ,
he whom thou ne'er leavest , genius ,
when pat came over the hill ,
the flute players , and the voices of the women
_ the first book of ballets to five voices _ , 1595 .
capt . benjamin brooks he came riding home
that burns all low desire ;
below , the funeral deep !
he chooses it the rather .
and , when i crossed the wild ,
at one blow selim 's head he stroke off quite ,
a yellow evening star ;
my week days spent in making money ,
limbs so fair , they might supply
nomore is reson thanne of myht ,
a thousand years of tears are in my heart ;
and no such word as reason ;
his brother chief he thus addressed :
a disputant in logic so exact . "
superior wonders in himself forgot ,
were he not gone ,
the former treason of the moorish spite ;
can ne'er be always bright ;
perfumes bathe him not , new - born ,
he weaves his songs with fresh tunes every time .
to menelaus ' bidding gave his care :
with wide calm eyes , and undrooped head ,
i shall not know such joy . alas , to me
said , ' this animal 's a bore ! ' and ,
and straight my head and thighs compressed
that would make thee , dear goddess , less dear than thou art !
celestial , marking me no more intent
wholly o'erwhelm it !
it quieted pain and sorrow ,
turn , and behold the brave euphorbus slain ;
my mother says , " the tradesman , dear !
not to save others is a curse
in charts and briefs their numbers are enrolled :
i dreaded fraud ! men , faithless men , betray
she purchased two parrots , and fed them with carrots ,
may hear our mutual murmurs sweep ;
an ' you know that the world o ' love be all around you .
than sall eird vpoun eird suffer grit showris .
myriads of rivulets hurrying through the lawn ,
to read with frowning eyes and discontented mind
each baron , for a sable shroud ,
the snail he lives in his hard round house ,
fallen asunder from his soul took flight ,
to him she spake , who swelled his breast and groaned
" now hearken ! " then the poet gazed
closing the sable lid!--with sighs i bear
for vengeance , up entellus springs again ,
" did you send for me , mr . mckinney ?   what
bring back the far - off intercepted hills ,
' i know , dear mother , it will give you joy--
first - born of the renascence , when thy soul
of all i e'er beheld . joy seized us straight ;
their follower through all thy life hast been ;
till fear no more had sav'd me :
how by the shaft of a god laid low was hero achilles .
“ to us , war ended ) fly , i warn thee , fly
that crowns the mountain - road , whereby
youths placed on pyre before their fathers ' eyes .
for thy boy will soon be sleeping
sundering the enamel .   " tell my lord , "
and earned the dying 's grateful prayers ,
" that which thou , too , desirest , " she answered .
and , host ’ gainst host in battle , set ,
from shores afar , from darkness unto light .
yet who have for the ' stars and bars '
my footstep from the moss which drew
rather than play the wooer but where my heart is set . "
may fear their host to injure , and repay
dante missed -- as angels may
had set the mark of silence on strong men--
in all men 's minds , against whatever odds .
though she sharply declared
i am not master of my pain ,
by day thy warning ringing bell to sound its notes ,
one gash from off my forehead raz'd : while they ,
_ scare - fires _ , alarms of fire .
and by his side his grandam grim
let all who are sad take heart again ;
the name is apt to express the essence ,
deep silence reigned , save when a gust
how art thou every year more beautiful ,
the deck approaching , shakes a flaming brand ;
the peer of the gods . howbeit , stricken by fate , he had ere
all vanish , and the lion feeds alone ;
of my body in tentacles .   through
and through the town news of the coming spread
and , with propitious gods , his foes assails :
and let not a man then be seen here ,
so from the fold the unwilling lion parts ,
and out of the cloud that smites , beneficent rivers of rain .
friends long estranged .
but when that heart is laid at rest--
she kissed him with a pity that wrung her heart , and he sighed
for oft , what once was love of yore ,
and when the sunset 's final shades depart
up in the mornin ' early !
by the gods ' grace to heart - sick mortals given ,
but whyle these folys ar glad to take in hande
and i must parley with the men of toil
and prayed to pass from earth away ;
and find each other good ,
and a thin voice piping
_ boddle _ , an old scottish coin -- value the third of a penny .
` for how might ever sweetnesse have be knowe
or richly weep ;
and far the universal fiat ran ,
o had she but been of a lower degree ,
sad that they are vanquish't so .
man is a dweller , where , in some past day ,
ascends -- ascends to heaven , a god ?
nought else befits a god - born energy ;
vitch now dese verses write .
all merchants , traders sleek and prosperous ,
let the merchant seek , who makes his silver pile ,
and camarina showeth next a long way off and dim ;
you loved me , pleaded for compassion
and the discomforts of the storm ,
for al this world , as wyd as it hath space ;
if so my fancy idly clings
beneath mesmeric lashes , where
where he used to sit when he used to think :
children dear , was it yesterday ?
at night , when passion 's ebbing tide
latter on the   west . a very ingenious writer has had occasion ,
in awful anarchy;--
never goes to the store but that right at his feet
risked life and land to be my guard ,
e'en gained from addison a glance ;
i try to skwush the tempter 's voice ' at urges me within ;
they say one king is mad .   perhaps .   who knows ?
of cesar : and whan he this purpose vnderstode
" i see , " said todd , " i 'm beaten . "
and he eats good food ,
but dear grandma is wrinkled and gray ,
our wisdom speaks from failing blood ,
as nuptial - gifts , to cymri 's mountain keeps
( 8)   scaevola , it would appear , was put to death after marius the
that thou , returned with honour to the bliss ,
th ' outstretching lake , embosom'd ' mong the hills ,
a smell of moss and grasses warm with dew , and far aloft
thought does . an idle distinction has been made between taste and
but hit be other up - on the haly - day ,
“ the very thing , o prince , which thou
bot i woll axen overthis
for saynt john sayth that he is sage
or want of wit of many a courtly brain .
trees may bud , and birds may sing ,
and here , unenvied , rural dainties taste . "
god keep us always so ! it is the chosen link
the radiant planet , that to love invites ,
and said , " there is more in this thing than appears !
dar she go mos ' ebry day
that had the world no joy but this
though kept from man , & worthy to be admir'd ,
he can defy
and though ye be the fairest of gods creatures ,
and winter nights were dark and rainy ;
until the poet said to me : " what thinkest ? "
so might we talk of the old familiar faces--
and planned to bring the world under a rule
" on hills that are by right his ain ,
this heart that flutters near my heart
tiny heart beneath my hand ? ...
cum vasta signum bucina
with mind from which the sunbeams fall ,
at " bridge " he always makes a slam
" fool ! fool ! " repeated he , while his eyes still
with slumber !   shriek , and run quick frenzied hands
as if they were changed into blocks of wood ,
and , wing'd with fear , at fullest speed they fly .
in them realities for you and me , in them poems for you and me ,
his selle and hunter 's head , and at his thigh
to narrow bounds .   the grove receives us next ;
as venturous in a lady 's bower :
my lord kenyon to apple - pie takes off his hat .
and near him rode silenus on his ass ,
" whom once he loved -- once!--_still _ loves dotingly .
a - talkin ' out there by the fence ,
attemper'd , eager now to roam , and search
and the aged lady abbess
lord god of hosts , be with us yet ,
of these distorted roots , elastic springs
the holy , useless shield of long - past wars ,
miscellanies of margaret fuller , the histories of hildreth ,
and i rose and rolled the turkey carpet back
struggled as thine .   but look intently thither ,
southeastern europe , being crowded out
to reap the ripen'd fruits the which the earth had yold .
o ring the bells ! o ring the bells !
as she stands among the poppies , hardly taller ,
said the child was born for dying ,
and where shall we stop ? " cried ann .
i woke and drank , and went to meat
let him contend with me in tourney , who
when deeper root the violets ,
upon the rafters .   it is gone ; is vanished .
though now in blissful ignorance they feast . "
their different forms , proud man , that moulded you .
the day comes in wi ' sorrow now , the night is wild an ' drear ,
o not too soon is rent the chain
none hail'd its coming ; the white floundering whales
the moorish messenger not only knows ,
if she or i have ever done
too late , too late we cling
of my song the fleetest runners ;
still rome is gainer by the civil war .
the shrine - lamp of god 's purposing is found .
when sick of muse , our follies we deplore ,
she 's ta'en a cake o ' the best bread ,
came thy godhead pale
when with no gen'rous quality endu'd :
bade her , in pride and pleasure ,
o'erspent , regain its virtue , with discourse
had fallen , and struck them on the head ;
my tongue - tied patience with too much disdain ;
the vánars sat them down and bent
and william rummler looked at her and thought
spread serene and calm before him ,
the aconite spreads ;
o day , o day , is it a little thing
and sharpest stones shall pierce my wounded feet ?
magnus , doubting still ;
o for a forty - parson power to chant
how fatal were the beams they threw ,
by oton - tala , like a sea of stars ,
through all her base and to her topmost peak
acceptable to god : and , for its sake ,
“ survey'd , when into phrygia 's realms dispatch'd
those eyes in tears their fruitless grief shall send ;
have i not had to wrestle with my lot ?
κλᾶιον , ἐπειδὴ πρῶτα πυθέσθην ἡνιόχοιο
i , with my trouses perched on cow - hide boots ,
and blood and wine were on his hands
and maggie took them nae amiss ;
the simpleness of human love ,
upward half way , or it may be
safe now is speilberg 's dungeon cell ,
that scruple checks him .   riot is not loud
and radiant opened out the countryside
attir'd , and spreading o'er the spacious heaven
but he wandered the earth , all forgot and alone ,
fer near it stood t’owd parsonage —
then bespake gode litulle johne ,
then comes a frank and merry knave ,
he came , and with his wand touch'd it , whereat
in fervency ; for wisdom upon earth ,
they marvel at the teucrian hearts so slack ,
“ when hermes ' son beheld the liquid stream ,
i can not bear a parent 's tears . but o !
they work and wait until god gives them rest ;
and yet ' tis flesh and blood alone
but minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their
nature gave joys , to take those joys again .
had finish'd now their office , and the fifth
all objects branded with one blood - bright spot .
in the dust of the garden - walk ,
" dat 's why you are cry , an ' you ' heart feel it sore ,
and said while awfully a smile
euolat ad patrias iam reditura domus .
beneath the king of fez , with a command
antagonist who had less of the salamander in him . as for
i lived to cross the bridge of ancient snow !
thou farest ever well ? "
who ne in virtue 's ways did take delight ;
has no sound upon the moss .
vivid with love , eager for greater beauty
i say an artist
if not , some two days ' length is all he can
then i so shook him in the saddle , he said ,
a lawful time of war at length will come ,
the common heath , became the spoiler 's prey ;
such madness in his cruel bosom wrought ,
why , then , that place in which such stock of soul
then gray terrors came sweeping upon her ,
with moths , toads , newts , and snakes red - gulleted ,
and what more -- god knows !
upright , as one dispos'd for speed , i rais'd
sweet bygane scenes , and native charms ,
whipping and veering ,
the chestnut trees are soon to flower
doubtful what ghostly thing will steal the last
gathered , delighted , set round in a ring--
we 'll do as their brave sires would do .
will ever poet utter more
in the vast concord , happiest of the throng .
sirens , daughters of acheloüs ; and the ship , deprived of its
and he 's passing it politely--
wrestle on a drifted isle ;
as the bleached sea - sand , ah , wearily , wearily ,
is something in her life . so now i lay
he folde up his sleve ,
and with glowing cheek and forehead ,
" if thou art but youkahainen ,
as with wing of the night - hawk -- her lover 's brave boat .
went he to the hisi - mountain ,
when they led on by hannibal o'erpass'd
clear of that guilt wherein i now must fall ,
bent on the earth his eager eyes :
thence countra wives , wi ' toil and pain ,
not bubbling fountains to the thirsty swain ,
the common lot of mortals , weighs thee down ;
it sure must be a weary lot ,
while each did fortune 's grace and aid implore ;
with weariness and hunger light of head ,
bear his mild yoke , they serve him best : his state
--oh , ever ' place -- and in here -- and up the stairs--
by myself again :
not thinking any harm ;
her feelings have the flagrancy ,
ere daybreak , with increasing light ,
nec tenerae salices atque herbae rore vigentis
to that fair fountain by whose stream
so into life the idle dream shall steal !
and day and night scarce changed the mournful skies .
chappin ' on the chair wi ' tangs ,
i kissed its little tiny hand ,
the poor child , ) that he was dead .
for fear you drowse perhaps at unawares !
the bridegroom looked at the weary road ,
o wha will to saint stephen 's house
from the red sea , a lamia 's palace ,
perchance , as is the halo from the light
would he kiss the maiden 's forehead white ! "
who work by day and sometimes drift by night
been extant , have developed three or four different readings ,
sat for the picture ; and the poet 's hand ,
“ on erisichthon . to their urgent prayers
till they shall singing fade in ruth ,
_ oh , love is like the sunlight
and , the last kindness left me then to do ,
how wept the mothers !   ' mid the pile confused
we would read together the poem
“ the great - armed monarch , o my lord ,
now close the windows and hush all the fields ;
" i would not we d the woman
whose dwelling is in ithaca . "
such miracles of power
and dote upon thee under moonlit skies ,
she sent an answer back that drew him on .
that he opened his elegant beak for much less .
sleep his very looks deny--
of angels , then that starr the starrs among )
where the mountain hare has lain .
when i think of jerusalem in kingdoms yet free ,
there lies the thing we love with all its errors
society packed up , went away .
so they could put the feet of the man they 'd rob
in peerless beauty , ' mid th ' eternal nympus ,
he 'll come that way no more ; then hear my door
yon mixtie - maxtie , queer hotch - potch ,
' trust him not , lettice , trust , oh trust him not ! '
he watches the scarce moving skies ,
receiv'd his visit with a grand salute .
and if he lived not all so , as one spoke ,
that dolorous man of cape horn .
of doings in meadow and wood and dell ,
but stood within , behind it .   lion 's footsteps rose ,
" i 'm weariet , an ' here i 'm awa ' to my bed . "
for darkling was the battle tried ,
resting not , beating down all the old traces ,
are the blessed gods dismay'd ?
then he sprung upon the gold - wing’d swimmer —
by glory , in our hearts by grace .
yet neighbourly are , and will go hand in hand ,
along the wreathëd tides we fled
o woman of the piercing wail ,
and the great woods are shrill .
and endless fame acquir'd ; but venus , child
" but if thou losest life , then all is lost . "
what pleaseth god .
are they who came from the town,--
an ' the lightnin'-bugs in dew is all squenched away,--
curled many a wanton wreath in sight of eve ,
married to immortal verse ,
an ' we maun draw our tippence .
heart , here are roses burning with the south--
all the boys and all the maidens ,
' as to be worship'd was my whole undoing ,
hydatides in the frontal sinus of sheep and calves by the
and bade the lilies bright with gold
but musical as is apollo 's lute ,
too well known to the many , to - day to be shown
" well , i 'll read from a book , " says father molloy ,
a job most illegant is on , cut out fer you ' n '
bring love back , love !
l'influence des littératures étrangères sur notre littérature .
and the wheeling swallows ,
never want for food or fire ,
tho ' bright eyes so abound , boy ,
xxiv     let the world 's sharpness like a clasping knife
and far from blate , o menie hay ! "
i would cover o'er my son .
' " lo now , in very truth the ancient oracles have come upon
she said , ' i must go , for my kinsfolk pray
was here by listening morning heard :
in a rock of many colors ;
i vainly liken'd to our country - town ,
were suddenly called to , and bidden
" but i wad gie a ' my halls and tours ,
street and market and bridge lie there
the last time , " said the sexton , " has not yet
upon the left , hidden by aged oaks ,
while the patching houseleek 's head of blossom winks
swift moving through the skies .
when with that daily payment which man owes ,
out onward to the deep , and roused up
sang he youth with golden virtues ,
make dead ,
{ * the distance here indicated seems to be that which the
and he to me : " thus speedily has led me
must .
i 've got to go , i 've got to go ;
tho was pronounced and pourposed ,
wore out their shoes , to spread the news ,
x    124 . st . paul healing the lame man with a word , & c.     r. wi .
an ' thought on youthfu ' pleasures mony ;
why fliest thou , coward - like , amid the throng ,
even as it was , with soul all flame
is all that he has counselled you .
kept up a constant groaning .
' nag , come up and dance with death ! '
bearing far his heavenly flame :
all were familiar as the fields of home .
sweet desir'd sleep already stealeth o'er me ,
" right over there is a morris chair--
shortly after his sixteenth birthday , young riley turned his back
for the president being both idle and lusty ,
our mortal view ; for they who dwell on high
but , laying hands on another
in case this great watchman chances to sleep .
anon like talk ' twixt lips not far apart .
his free will , to her own inclining left
thus from his flaggy wings when notus sheds
with odds what warr hath lost , and fully aveng'd
while joy gave clouds the light of stars ,
what life is , so clear ?
four - and - twenty blackbirds
but spring from ceremonious fears .
the scattering arrows , rattling from the case ,
this exiled race , who their lost shores bemoan ,
and is only now thawing , dear roger , like thee .
when he flashed his stones .   " mother , the green
the way between is difficult and long ,
and fiercest anger , which will sometimes spur
to that young head which soon shall rise
of oene 's realms i sailed ; save now and then
dear myra , the captive ribband 's mine ,
for the angelic sound of thy sweet lips ,
let her pure promptings stablish in thy heart
chang'd to _ apollos _ in a trice ,
ascanius young , and eager of his game ,
the sleeping man was greatly struck
but that enormous barrier binds it fast .
from the angles in the east      --of eormanric ,
dwg dristwas , dig drystan ,
her language , tho ' sweet , none could e'er understand ;
in the dust while he was yet speaking . they took the ferret - skin
i was not there ,
and as a glorious combatant ,
the place was desolate and gray ;
would'st see a man all his own wealth ,
fine soul of a land struck with brightest sun - tints ,
ut ridentibus arrident , ita flentibus adflent
and the slow , mountant atoll knows no rest .
consenting in full frequence was impowered ,
how proud of them the driver was ! and often he would brag
allusion to this original of his name in that passage ,
and the sea - tides tossing free ;
each night strewed star - dust o'er my head ;
and about those other words of his :
and from his eyes flashed a gorgonian light ,
manners so kind , yet stately , such a grace
as if they peep'd into a glass :
and to your god immortal anthems raise .
and ( to be rid of her ) to dy ,
still on its slopes the ploughman 's ridges show
one ask'd me where the roses grew :
" where have you been this while away ? "
the long , long road to avignon ,
serving his best advantage in the enlarged domain
to dwell , for that the sacristy by me
drew the sacred , magic circle
this is she at the last .
shining spiritual presence , which is removed from its context in
saw him away .
on , like a vulture , sprang meriones ,
never be raised to life by a new blessing ?
we have gathered fightin ' pointers from the famous bronco steed
antonio cursed st . clare in rhyme
circumfusa super , suauis ex ore loquelas
is gifted beyond nature 's law--
they rushed forth , suddenly remembered babes
i was like a moth---
nor seek to shatter any plan that he might
but the jessamine fragrant waxed purer with light ;
no -- faint tho ' the death - song may fall from his lips ,
till i , who listened , lay still , entranced .
you catchee my washee -- me catchee no stamp ;
arthur , " in two years more ( 1697 ) he sent into the world " king
to greet . " laertes ' son , what news bringst thou ? "
a coat of mail , that it need not fear
dropped on the clods that hide thy face ;
so , homebound soldier , watch your step ,
have yielded to the stranger : empty halls ,
but , when her gallant sons have died ,
hear ye not the summoning call ,
courage , ne'er by sorrow broken !
on queda 's fields the genial rays inspire
yet i bear a heart shall support me still.--
but blaine is safe , and the goose hangs high--
and plenty is my gold ,
and well they know he loves them so
he sat for hours on the bank that day ,
and his dark secret love
firs upon the rocks of horna ,
where all is terrible and strange and fair ,
red earth
they dwell in happy wise .
o when , in the spring i return from the plough ,
on english hexameters , 353 f. ;
and , as the rákshas near him drew ,
bras lourds de bracelets barbares , en essors
o'er all the merry meads he knew
the pearl to plunge for in the sea of life ;
and their most righteous customs made me scorn
yet in thy veins thy mother 's southern blood
give him the final bliss . that was the proof
sister , my sister , o fleet sweet swallow ,
here therefore satisfaction shall be soon
like the pallor of dead bodies .
that any suff'rance of your misery
he hears our tears as falls the dew .
" now where we are i can not tell ,
we should feel that they were winging
" to work the will of heaven ,
an everlasting fame .
at his miracles of concord .
he sih the wepinge al aboute ,
arise , i cried , and celebrate the hour !
and dared the sturdy blusterer to the fight ,
this opens the bright mansions of the blessed ;
learn to labor with thy kindred ;
laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep .
our paper , pen , and ink , and we ,
forth of the dark wherein its records rest ,
nearer at hand , he made me then aware
_ of the forging of the sword that is called the wrath of sigurd . _
yea , when at last the janitor draws near ,
for i fear a hurricane .
skim the loch in canty glee ,
can make a house a thing of mine ?
so abraham set out , mindful of the instructions of the
saving barns and homes and cattle ,
about the town .
" gi'e up your house , ye ladye fair ,
ne'er - forgotten queen of hours of blisses .
nor , of a truth , much marvelled they
he might have ' scap'd the bitter doom of death .
los pundonores guardar ,
is all alive
the soft complaint shall over time prevail ;
what may the issue be ; if we shall light
and load the democratic gun
prevent father from having you dip into the morning's-
servantz , and ech in his office
a snake approach'd . but phœbus gave his aid ,
it's -- oh , for the lane , the trysting lane ,
of groves , and dying gales , and melancholy rills .
nay , go not thou to the red - roofed town
he never gazed on carcassonne .
ay , jetted such brave fire that they ,
when winds without make moan ,
to mark the whole --- must drawl along
the monarch hears ,
i have an island , too , and so
that maid 's the noble brunhild , at once so fair and fell ,
why do you thus their presence greet ? "
see the fur coats go by !
the silence , far below .
cedar - houses bears the atlas
o say not so , my maddened heart ! far from my hand
temple , and a pain stung me through the heart .
for the rage of the deep has no terrors for me ;
or a coral lip admires ,
his clothes were all torn with her claws ,
shineth the summer moon .
no shame of all her rents had she ;
it was a very pleasant game ,
go forth the lady at her farm to find ,
for the laughter of your lips ,
and make my grave with thee . "
girt with long snakes and thousand yron chaynes ,
snowdrop that nestled close to the vine .
we came back by the village fields ,
of the delusiveness of change ,
o for him back again !
replete with water from the crystal springs ;
the jolly god in triumph comes !
stands guiltless forth ?
he often drubs
see the keen flame throb and tremble ,
at the banquet sat osseo ;
the blue - ey'd pallas to the god of war ;
to vex their solemn slumber so ;
eve a dying radiance flings ,
the public knew no more than does this rhyme ;
a lake so broad .   the newness of the sound ,
twirl three notes and make a star--
is like the stir made             and wonderment swell
and under him his master tumbling lay :
and some well chosen words of politeness , to go .
to warn , to comfort , and command ;
around the silver pillars : high o'er head
in bosoms without number , as the blow
the lands that yet in human prospect lie !
it 's when i 'm weary of considerations ,
unto the fiedinge of myn yhe .
them , and sailed over the wet ways , and zeus sent us a
raise my loved long - lost boy
our gustatory nerves pervade ,
and the dust , the tattered paper--
only one sad breast was found .
and sleeps , a tangled mass of shapeless leaves .
heavy the burden i 'm bearing to - day ;
lights on a heap of nitrous powder , laid
and a whooping billow swept the crew
" hi ! ammunition - mules an ' gunga din ! "
and kneeling there as at a sacred shrine
the blood of tamerlane and chinghiz khan ,
_ high harrogate , august 16th . _
eight left of us , all punctured , each man
they are windows opening on a world as small as your
the starlight shook as if with sound ,
longer , i should have , but -- i do _ not _ love you at this minute . "
a lord of persia , rich and great ,
set him in sacred pergamus , where his temple stood . there , within
whilst you would happily incur
and the rose - leaf that we tread on
who wastes his life pursuing little birds ,
i heard her gentle voice recounting o'er
rack'd by the gout and stone , and struck with age ,
handsome is this noble damsel ,
emblems of the bright and better land .
_ margaret _ . our household is but small , i own ,
and offred with gret reverence ,
present time     and so farewell ( our task is done )
--unlightened , curious , meek ,
and when she list advaunce her heavenly voyce ,
& i so hyȝe out of age & also my lorde , ”
rang , and the foemen perished , and swift death ,
or sadness in the summer moons ? "
his little flying feet
the scene thus drawing to a close ,    }
it 's quite the other way--
weep , caverns , weep ! with infiltering drip ,
on proud ambition 's pleasing gales upborne ,
long - winded detail of it . ’ ]
upon mount royal 's side .
on which birds call to the hours :
when the mongrel men that the market classes
bear it from sea to sea ; and on some quay
and they said , " ' tis the work of the treacherous og !
with a cane in his hand and a quill at his ear .
she , from its sea - dyed maziness of pearl ,
the lifted hand . at thoas ' face he threw
nature could not sorrow hide :
while grave rebuke flashed from his eyes .
